Title: VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.00421v1

Published Time: Wed, 02 Sep 2026 00:30:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing 

PENG DANG, SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and Univer-sity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 

YINTAO HE, SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 

HUAWEI LI, SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China ReRAM-based in-memory computing (IMC) architectures are widely regarded as a promising approach to alleviating the computational bottleneck of conventional architectures. Since ReRAM crossbars perform matrix-vector multiplication (MVM) in the analog domain, their computational energy consumption is highly dependent on weight and activation distributions. However, most existing ReRAM accelerators focus primarily on weight optimization while paying limited attention to the impact of activations on computational energy consumption, leaving the energy-saving potential of activation sparsity largely underexploited. In this paper, we propose a voltage-aware ReRAM-based accelerator (VARA), along with its accompanying design methodology. Specifically, we first introduce a voltage-aware training (VAT) algorithm that incorporates a preset threshold into the activation function to steer the activation distribution toward zero values, thereby enhancing activation sparsity. Building upon this, we further propose a co-zero activation reordering (CAR) scheme for crossbar-level computation skipping. CAR clusters activation dimensions based on their co-zero correlations and consistently reorders both the activation matrix and its corresponding weights. This process consolidates scattered zero activations into contiguous zero-valued regions to maximize the benefits of crossbar-level computation skipping. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that, with only marginal accuracy loss, VARA reduces the average total system energy consumption by 60.12% and improves the average system energy efficiency by 2.68 × compared to the baseline, outperforming existing state-of-the-art accelerators for sparse-activation optimization. CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Non-volatile memory ; Emerging architectures ; • Computer systems organization → Neural networks .Additional Key Words and Phrases: In-memory computing, ReRAM crossbar, activation function, computation skipping, energy efficiency 

ACM Reference Format: 

Peng Dang, Yintao He, and Huawei Li. 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing. X, X, Article XXX (May 2026), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

Authors’ Contact Information: Peng Dang, SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, dangpeng21@mails.ucas.ac.cn; Yintao He, SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; Huawei Li, SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, lihuawei@ict.ac.cn. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. © 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM XXXX-XXXX/2026/5-ARTXXX https://doi.org/10.1145/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. arXiv:2609.00421v1 [cs.AR] 31 Aug 2026 XXX:2 Peng Dang et al. 

1 Introduction 

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely applied in domains such as computer vision and natural language processing [27]. However, as model sizes and computational complexity continue to increase, deploying DNNs on resource-constrained edge devices poses significant challenges in terms of energy efficiency [2, 43]. To address these challenges, researchers have extensively explored hardware acceleration, model compression, and emerging computing paradigms. These efforts aim to improve the computational efficiency of neural networks by reducing computational and storage overheads [34]. Among these approaches, resistive random-access memory (ReRAM)-based IMC architectures integrate storage and computation, enabling MVM to be performed directly within crossbar arrays. This integration substantially reduces data movement between memory and processing units [44]. As a result, ReRAM-based neural network accelerators are considered a promising approach to alleviating the “memory wall” bottleneck inherent in conventional von Neumann architectures [25, 26, 30]. In ReRAM-based accelerators, MVM operations are performed in parallel within crossbars in the analog domain. Their computational energy consumption depends strongly on device conductances and input voltages. Specifically, neural network weights are mapped to the conductances of ReRAM cells, while input activations are encoded as voltages applied to the crossbar. The input voltages and device conductances jointly determine the currents generated by individual memory cells. These currents are subsequently accumulated along the bitlines to produce analog output currents [44]. The magnitudes of the bitline currents affect not only the energy consumption of the crossbar itself but also that of the downstream peripheral circuits [15]. Consequently, the value distributions of both neural network weights and activations significantly influence the overall computational energy consumption of ReRAM accelerators by altering the internal crossbar currents. Prior studies [4, 14, 15] have demonstrated that the weight distributions of binary neural networks (BNNs) can be shaped to increase the proportion of high-resistance-state (HRS) devices in ReRAM crossbars. A higher HRS proportion suppresses bitline currents and reduces the power consumption of crossbars and analog-to-digital converters (ADCs). However, these approaches primarily focus on optimizing weight distributions and encoding schemes, while paying limited attention to the impact of activation distributions on system energy consumption. In fact, activations are mapped to input voltages in ReRAM accelerators, and their value distributions likewise directly affect the magnitudes of bitline currents within the crossbars. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), when all input activations are “1”, valid read voltages are applied to all wordlines. The bitline current consequently reaches its maximum value ( 𝐼 max ). Under this condition, the ReRAM crossbar operates at peak power consumption ( 𝑃 max ), and the downstream ADC also operates at its maximum power level. Conversely, as shown in Fig. 1(b), when all input activations are “0”, the corresponding wordline voltages become zero. No effective multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations occur within the crossbar, and the bitline current drops to zero. This phenomenon indicates that the activation distribution significantly affects the power consumption of both the crossbar and its peripheral circuits, particularly the energy-intensive ADC modules. Furthermore, when a crossbar receives an all-zero input vector, its output is necessarily zero. Therefore, the associated crossbar computation and analog-to-digital conversion are unnecessary. This computational predictability enables the system to selectively skip these redundant operations and eliminate unnecessary dynamic power consumption. This activation-dependent computational characteristic provides a key design insight for the energy-efficiency optimization strategy proposed in this work. Although the all-zero input skipping mechanism holds substantial potential for energy efficiency optimization, existing studies [7, 16, 24, 37, 40, 41] still face two fundamental limitations. First,     

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:3 Figure1
> …
> ……
> All-ones
> Crossbar
> Worst case
> (a)
> 𝐼𝐼max
> ……
> …
> All-zeros
> Crossbar
> Best case
> (b)
> 𝐼𝐼min
> ……
> …
> Crossbar
> (c)
> 𝐼𝐼mid

Fig. 1. Impact of activation distributions on the output current of ReRAM crossbars. 

although conventional activation functions such as ReLU naturally produce a certain proportion of zero activations, standard model training does not explicitly optimize activation sparsity, imposing an upper bound on the proportion of exploitable all-zero inputs. Second, and more importantly, high activation sparsity does not directly translate into opportunities for crossbar computation skipping. Due to the highly scattered distribution of nonzero activations across input dimensions, even when the overall activation matrix is extremely sparse, the input vectors mapped to individual ReRAM crossbars are likely to contain a few nonzero elements. This forces the corresponding crossbars and peripheral circuits to execute full computations, preventing the triggering of all-zero input skipping. Therefore, simultaneously increasing the proportion of zero activations and transforming scattered zero activations into directly exploitable all-zero input vectors remains a key challenge in maximizing the benefits of crossbar-level computation skipping. To address the aforementioned challenges, this paper proposes VARA, a voltage-aware ReRAM accelerator architecture. By integrating the VAT algorithm with the CAR scheme, VARA enables co-optimization across model training and deployment. Specifically, the main contributions of this work are as follows: 

• We propose VARA, a voltage-aware ReRAM accelerator architecture that exploits the inher-ent relationship between activation distributions and computational power consumption. Through co-design spanning model training and deployment, VARA effectively harnesses the energy-efficiency potential of activation sparsity. 

• We propose the VAT algorithm to enhance activation sparsity. By introducing a predefined threshold into the activation function and jointly optimizing network parameters during training, VAT drives low-magnitude activations toward zero, significantly increasing the zero activation ratio (ZAR) without compromising model accuracy. 

• Building upon the sparsity model induced by the VAT algorithm, we propose a CAR scheme. While preserving computational equivalence, CAR reorders the dimensions of activation and weight matrices to consolidate scattered zero activations into contiguous structured sparse regions, maximizing the occurrence probability of all-zero input vectors. 

• Experimental results across multiple networks and datasets demonstrate that, compared with the baseline, VARA reduces total system energy consumption by an average of 60.12% and improves system energy efficiency by an average of 2.68 ×, while incurring only a minor accuracy loss. These results validate the effectiveness of the proposed design in improving the energy efficiency of ReRAM accelerators. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the background of ReRAM-based accelerators and analyzes the relationship between activation distributions and  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:4 Peng Dang et al.

system-level computational energy consumption. Section 3 describes the proposed VARA architec-ture, detailing the co-optimization mechanism of VAT and CAR. Section 4 presents the experimental setup and evaluation results, along with comparisons against baseline designs. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper. 

2 Background and Motivation 2.1 ReRAM-Based Neural Network Accelerators 

In neural network computing, MVM constitutes the dominant computational workload [28, 35]. By integrating storage and computation, ReRAM-based accelerators can efficiently execute MVM operations within crossbar arrays [12, 33, 39]. However, since ReRAM crossbars natively support only MVM operations, extending their in-situ parallel computing capability to convolutional layers requires the image-to-column (Img2Col) transformation. This process converts convolutions into general matrix multiplication (GEMM), which is subsequently decomposed into a series of MVM operations executable by the crossbar [3, 31]. As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), let the spatial dimensions of the input activation feature map be 𝐻 in × 𝑊 in , the number of input channels be 𝐶 in , the kernel size be 𝐾 × 𝐾 , and the number of output channels be 𝐶 out . Through the Img2Col operation, the input feature map is unrolled via a sliding window into a two-dimensional activation matrix 𝑋 col , while the convolution kernels are reshaped into a weight matrix 𝑊 col . Following this transformation, the original convolution is equivalently formulated as a standard matrix multiplication 𝑌 col = 𝑊 col 𝑋 col .This equivalent formulation allows convolutional computation to be mapped onto ReRAM crossbars in matrix form [8]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, in ReRAM accelerators, neural network weights are mapped to the conductance values of ReRAM cells, while input activations are converted into analog voltages via digital-to-analog converters (DACs) and applied to the crossbar along the wordlines [44]. According to Ohm’s law and Kirchhoff’s current law, each input voltage is multiplied by the corresponding cell conductance, and the resulting currents are accumulated on the bitlines to form the output current [10]. Specifically, the output current on the 𝑗 -th bitline can be expressed as: 

𝐼 𝑗 =

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝐺 𝑖 𝑗 · 𝑉 𝑖 (1) where 𝐺 𝑖 𝑗 denotes the conductance of the ReRAM cell at the 𝑖 -th row and 𝑗 -th column, 𝑉 𝑖 represents the input voltage applied to the 𝑖 -th wordline, and 𝐼 𝑗 indicates the output current on the 𝑗 -th bitline. Subsequently, the bitline currents are quantized into digital signals by ADCs and forwarded to downstream processing units for further computation [13]. During model deployment, a single ReRAM crossbar cannot directly accommodate an entire MVM task due to its limited physical dimensions, interconnect IR drop, and the drive capability of peripheral circuits. Consequently, the complete MVM computation must be partitioned into multiple subtasks and mapped across several ReRAM crossbars for parallel processing [20, 36]. The analog partial sum currents from each crossbar are quantized by ADCs and then globally accumulated in the digital domain to reconstruct the final MVM result. However, this mixed-signal computing architecture introduces new design challenges. Specifically, high-resolution ADCs required to ensure readout accuracy of analog partial sums incur substantial power overhead, becoming a critical bottleneck that limits further improvements in system energy efficiency [5, 19, 21]. 

2.2 Activation-Dependent Power Characteristics in ReRAM Accelerators 

At the crossbar input, input activations are converted into analog voltages 𝑉 𝑖 via DACs and applied to the corresponding wordlines of the crossbar. During analog computation, the power consumption    

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:5 …
> K K
> Activation
> ………
> KK
> Kernel
> Non-zero activation region
> …
> …
> K K
> ……

(a) (b) 

> Matrix partitioning direction Zero activation region Structurally redundant weight region

Fig. 2. Comparison between conventional matrix computation and co-zero activation reordering. (a) In the conventional implementation, zero activations are scattered, making crossbar-level skipping difficult. (b) Co-zero activation reordering consistently reorders the activation and weight, consolidating scattered zero activations into highly concentrated zero regions and creating skippable redundant weight regions. 

associated with the 𝑗 -th bitline can be approximated as 

𝑃 XB ,𝑗 =∑︁ 

> 𝑖

𝑉 2 

> 𝑖

𝐺 𝑖 𝑗 =∑︁ 

> 𝑖

𝐼 2 

> 𝑖 𝑗

𝑅 𝑖 𝑗 (2) This expression indicates that when an activation value is zero, the voltage applied to the corre-sponding wordline becomes zero, and the dynamic power consumption of the associated memory cell also drops to zero. Therefore, increasing the proportion of zero activations can directly reduce the dynamic energy consumption of ReRAM crossbars. At the crossbar output, bitline currents also affect the dynamic energy consumption of the subsequent ADCs [4, 14, 15]. As a major contributor to peripheral power consumption in ReRAM accelerators, an ADC consumes dynamic power primarily through the charging and discharging of its sampling capacitor [1]. Letting 𝑅 𝐿 denote the load resistance, the relationship between the ADC input voltage 𝑉 in and the current 𝐼 𝑗 on the 𝑗 -th bitline is given by 𝑉 in = 𝐼 𝑗 𝑅 𝐿 . At a sampling frequency of 𝑓 , the dynamic power consumption of the ADC in the 𝑗 -th column can be approximated as [1, 44] 

𝑃 ADC ,𝑗 = 12 𝑓 𝐶𝑉 2in = 12 𝑓 𝐶  𝐼 𝑗 𝑅 𝐿 

2 (3) where 𝐶 represents the sampling capacitance. Combining Eq. (1) and Eq. (3) reveals that, for fixed hardware parameters 𝑓 , 𝐶 , and 𝑅 𝐿 , the ADC dynamic power is proportional to the square of the bitline current, which is jointly determined by input voltages and weight conductances. Consequently, optimizing the activation distribution not only reduces the computational power consumption of ReRAM crossbars but also exploits the quadratic dependence of ADC dynamic power on bitline current to achieve substantial energy savings. 

2.3 Research Motivation 

As discussed in Section 1, when the input vector to a ReRAM crossbar is entirely zero, the crossbar output can be predicted to be zero before computation. By exploiting this computational predictabil-ity, the system can directly skip the corresponding crossbar-level computation. Such hardware-level optimization potential can be effectively unlocked through a hardware-aware training strategy. The significant over-parameterization of DNNs provides considerable flexibility for regulating their internal activation distributions [42]. Prior studies [4, 14, 15] have demonstrated that introducing a predefined threshold into the sign function can effectively reshape the weight distributions of BNNs.  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:6 Peng Dang et al.

Inspired by this observation, we modify the zero-decision threshold of nonlinear activation func-tions to actively drive low-magnitude activations that contribute little to network representations toward zero. Regulating activation distributions in this manner not only substantially increases the ZAR but also establishes the sparsity foundation for crossbar-level computation skipping. However, high element-wise activation sparsity alone does not necessarily translate into in-creased opportunities for crossbar-level computation skipping. As shown in Fig. 2(a), conventional matrix mapping typically partitions along the activation dimension order without considering co-zero correlations among different activation dimensions. Even when the activation matrix is globally sparse, zero activations scattered across input dimensions result in nonzero elements within individual crossbar input vectors, thereby preventing crossbar-level skipping. Furthermore, sorting by the independent zero rate of each dimension is insufficient, as it captures only the marginal zero probability per dimension while ignoring the joint distribution of dimensions that are simultaneously zero at identical input positions. Therefore, it is essential to exploit co-zero correlations among activation dimensions during the mapping phase to group dimensions with similar zero patterns into the same crossbar, as illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Through such reordering, the probability of all-zero input vectors is maximized, converting discrete element-wise sparsity into substantial crossbar redundancy, thereby maximizing the benefits of computation skipping. Based on the above analysis, this work identifies the activation distribution as the primary target for energy-efficiency optimization in ReRAM accelerators. The feasibility of this approach rests on two interrelated observations. First, the activation distribution can be actively regulated during training to increase the proportion of zero activations. Second, co-zero correlations among activation dimensions can be leveraged during deployment to reorder and consolidate scattered zero activations. This process transforms element-wise sparsity into exploitable structured redun-dancy. To this end, we propose a VAT algorithm and a CAR scheme. Specifically, VAT increases the element-wise ZAR by adjusting the zero-decision threshold of the activation function. CAR then consistently reorders the activation dimensions and their corresponding weight mappings, consolidating scattered zero activations into contiguous, structured all-zero regions. This reordering substantially increases the probability of triggering hardware-level computation skipping. Together, VAT and CAR enable joint optimization of system-level performance. 

3 Methodology 

This section systematically presents the proposed VARA architecture. We first provide an overview of the overall architectural design of VARA. Subsequently, we detail the VAT algorithm for reshaping activation distributions. Finally, we elaborate on the CAR scheme and explain how it transforms the sparsity induced by VAT into exploitable structured redundancy to reduce system energy consumption. 

3.1 VARA Architecture 

We propose VARA, a voltage-aware ReRAM accelerator architecture. As illustrated in Fig. 2, VARA adopts a hierarchical organization and primarily consists of buffers, index units (IUs), data con-version modules, accumulation units, and processing elements (PEs). The buffers store input data and intermediate computation results. The IUs store the activation-dimension permutation indices generated by the co-zero reordering algorithm. The DACs convert activations into analog input voltages, while the ADCs convert bitline output currents into digital signals. The accumulation units aggregate the partial sums produced by individual crossbars to generate the final computation results. Each PE performs the core MVM operations. Multiple PEs are further integrated into a tile, and the tiles are interconnected through a network-on-chip (NoC), forming a scalable parallel computing architecture.     

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:7 VAT Split
> …
> Deploy Conventional network layer Sparsity-enhanced network layer Partitioned network layer
> More zeros
> CAR scheme
> Accumulation Buffer Vector Unit Index Unit Controller
> …
> …
> DAC ADC DAC ADC DAC ADC DAC ADC
> All-zero
> Non-all-zero

Fig. 3. The VARA architecture based on the VAT algorithm and CAR scheme. 

As illustrated in Fig. 3, the VARA architecture leverages the synergy between the VAT algorithm and the CAR scheme to establish a complete pipeline from activation sparsity optimization to hardware deployment and computation skipping. First, VAT enhances element-wise activation sparsity by adjusting the zero-decision threshold of the activation function. Building upon this, CAR enables crossbar-level computation skipping through a combination of offline deployment and online execution. During the offline deployment phase, CAR reorders the flattened activation dimensions based on their co-zero correlations across different dimensions. To preserve compu-tational equivalence, the index order of the corresponding weight matrix dimensions is adjusted synchronously. Subsequently, the reordered activation and weight matrices are partitioned accord-ing to the ReRAM crossbar size. Redundant weight submatrices corresponding to all-zero inputs are identified and pruned to reduce the required hardware resources. Finally, the remaining valid weight submatrices are mapped onto ReRAM crossbars to complete model deployment. During online inference, the system reorders the input activations according to the predefined indices stored in the IU, and then partitions and broadcasts the reordered activation matrix to the retained ReRAM crossbars. Because redundant crossbars have already been removed from the physical mapping during offline deployment, the corresponding data transfers, crossbar computa-tions, and data conversions are no longer required during online inference. Consequently, CAR eliminates coarse-grained redundant crossbar computations with minimal index-lookup overhead while preserving strict computational equivalence. 

3.2 Voltage-Aware Training Algorithm 

3.2.1 Voltage-Aware Training Algorithm for Step Functions. In conventional BNN implementa-tions [4, 29, 38], the sign function (Sign) is typically used during forward propagation to constrain real-valued activations to {− 1, +1}. In this work, to enable zero activations to be mapped to zero input voltages, we adopt a step function (Step), as illustrated in Fig. 4(a), to restrict activations to {0, +1}. Furthermore, to enhance activation sparsity, we introduce an adjustable activation threshold 𝜃 into the activation binarization process, constructing a voltage-aware step (VA-Step) function, as shown in Fig. 4(b). Given a real-valued pre-activation 𝑎 𝑟 , the binarization process is defined as follows: 

𝑎 𝑏 =

(

+1, if 𝑎 𝑟 ≥ 𝜃, 

0, otherwise . (4) where 𝑎 𝑏 denotes the binarized activation output. As shown in Fig. 4(e)–(f), under the standard Step function, the proportion of zeros is approxi-mately 50%. In contrast, VA-Step allows control over the ratio of activations mapped to 0 versus 

+1 by adjusting the threshold 𝜃 , resulting in a more skewed activation distribution. Specifically, introducing the activation threshold 𝜃 shifts the binarization decision boundary from 0 in the standard binarization function to 𝜃 . During training, this threshold drives more activations toward        

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:8 Peng Dang et al. (a) Step function (b) VA-Step function (c) ReLU function (d) VA-ReLU function
> 0
> Density
> 10
> Density
> 10
> Density
> 0
> Density
> (e) Step distribution (f) VA-Step distribution (g) ReLU distribution (h) VA-ReLU distribution

Fig. 4. Comparison of activation functions. (a)–(d) show the Step, VA-Step, ReLU, and VA-ReLU functions, respectively; (e)–(h) depict their corresponding activation distributions. 

0, increasing the sparsity of the binary activation outputs. Fig. 5 illustrates the effects of different 

𝜃 values on the activation distribution. As 𝜃 increases, the proportion of zeros in the activation outputs gradually increases. To address the non-differentiability of the VA-Step binarization function during backpropaga-tion, we employ a Sigmoid-based straight-through estimator (STE) for gradient approximation. Specifically, given 𝑧 = 𝑎 𝑟 − 𝜃 , the soft surrogate function is defined as 

𝜎 (𝑧 ) = 11 + 𝑒 −𝑡𝑧 , (5) where 𝑡 is a temperature coefficient that controls the steepness of the Sigmoid approximation to the hard step function. By applying the chain rule, the gradient of the loss function 𝐿 with respect to 𝑎 𝑟 is approximated as: 

𝜕𝐿 𝜕𝑎 𝑟 

= 𝜕𝐿 𝜕𝜎 (𝑧 ) · 𝜕𝜎 (𝑧 )

𝜕𝑧 · 𝜕𝑧 𝜕𝑎 𝑟 

= 𝜕𝐿 𝜕𝜎 (𝑧 ) · 𝑡𝜎 (𝑧 ) ( 1 − 𝜎 (𝑧 )) . (6) This surrogate function provides smooth, nonzero gradients near the threshold, thereby alleviating the gradient discontinuity caused by hard binarization and improving the stability of gradient propagation and parameter optimization during training. 

3.2.2 Voltage-Aware Training Algorithm for ReLU Functions. As shown in Fig. 4(c), in neural net-works employing the ReLU activation function, negative pre-activations are truncated to zero. Therefore, ReLU inherently introduces a certain degree of activation sparsity. To further increase the proportion of zero activations, as illustrated in Fig. 4(d), we introduce a preset threshold 𝜃 

into the ReLU function, constructing the voltage-aware ReLU (VA-ReLU). By suppressing positive pre-activations with small magnitudes, this method extends the zero output region from (−∞ , 0]

to (−∞ , 𝜃 ], enhancing activation sparsity while preserving nonlinear expressiveness. Given a real-valued pre-activation 𝑎 𝑟 , VA-ReLU is defined as 

𝑎 = max (0, 𝑎 𝑟 − 𝜃 ) =

(

𝑎 𝑟 − 𝜃, if 𝑎 𝑟 > 𝜃, 

0, otherwise , (7) where 𝑎 denotes the activation output and 𝜃 represents the preset threshold used to regulate activation sparsity.    

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:9 Pre-activation Partitioned network layer
> 00
> 0000
> (All zeros)
> 0.5
> (More zeros)
> 0.3
> 00
> +1 000
> (Baseline)
> 0
> +1 0
> +1 0+1 0
> 0.1 -0.2
> 0.4 -0.6 0.2 -0.1
> Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 DAC ADC Crossbar
> Shift & Add

Fig. 5. Activation outputs of VA-Step under different activation thresholds. 

As shown in Figs. 4(g)–(h), under the standard ReLU function, the proportion of zero activations is approximately 50%. In contrast, VA-ReLU reshapes the activation distribution by introducing a preset threshold 𝜃 . Specifically, when 𝜃 = 0, VA-ReLU is equivalent to standard ReLU. When 𝜃 > 0, the activation decision boundary of VA-ReLU shifts from 0 in standard ReLU to 𝜃 . As training progresses, this threshold truncates pre-activations below 𝜃 to zero, leading to a significant increase in activation sparsity within the network. Since VA-ReLU remains a piecewise linear function in form, its backpropagation can be computed using the piecewise derivative of ReLU. Specifically, for a given pre-activation 𝑎 𝑟 , the derivative of the activation output 𝑎 with respect to 𝑎 𝑟 is 

𝜕𝑎 𝜕𝑎 𝑟 

=

(

1, 𝑎 𝑟 > 𝜃, 

0, otherwise . (8) By applying the chain rule, the gradient of the loss function 𝐿 with respect to the pre-activation 𝑎 𝑟 

is expressed as: 

𝜕𝐿 𝜕𝑎 𝑟 

= 𝜕𝐿 𝜕𝑎 · 𝜕𝑎 𝜕𝑎 𝑟 

. (9) Consequently, gradients propagate to the preceding layer only when the pre-activation exceeds the threshold 𝜃 , whereas gradients corresponding to low-magnitude pre-activations suppressed to zero are truncated. At the boundary point 𝑎 𝑟 = 𝜃 , we adopt the same subgradient convention as standard ReLU, setting the derivative to 0. 

3.3 Crossbar-Level Computation Skipping via Co-Zero Activation Reordering 

As shown in Fig. 5, following optimization via VAT, the proportion of zero-valued activations increases significantly, exhibiting higher sparsity. As illustrated by Case 3, when 𝜃 exceeds a certain level, some crossbars receive all-zero input vectors. According to the analysis in Section 2.2, the MVM operations performed by these crossbars make no effective contribution to the final output and can therefore be directly skipped. However, despite the substantial increase in element-wise activation sparsity, zero activations remain highly scattered across the input dimensions of the activation matrix, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Consequently, all-zero input vectors rarely occur naturally, making it difficult to satisfy the condition for computation skipping. To address this issue, this section proposes CAR. By reordering the activation indices of the VAT-trained model, CAR consolidates scattered zeros into dense local regions. This consolidation maximizes the opportunities for crossbar-level computation skipping. 

3.3.1 Clustering-Based Co-Zero Activation Reordering Algorithm. As illustrated in Fig. 6, consis-tently reordering activations and their corresponding weight indices in matrix operations preserves 

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026.

XXX:10 Peng Dang et al. (a) Before reordering (Standard matrix multiplication) 

(b) After reordering (Applying the same permutation to both W and X) 

> Weight matrix W (4×8)

×                                    

> Activation matrix X (8×4)
> ID p1 p2 p3 p4 d1 x11 x12 x13 x14
> d2 x21 x22 x23 x24
> d3 x31 x32 x33 x34
> d4 x41 x42 x43 x44
> d5 x51 x52 x53 x54
> d6 x61 x62 x63 x64
> d7 x71 x72 x73 x74
> d8 x81 x82 x83 x84

=

> Output matrix Y (4×4) Reordered weight matrix W′ (4×8)

×                                    

> Reordered activation matrix X′ (8×4)
> ID p1 p2 p3 p4 d3 x31 x32 x33 x34
> d1 x11 x12 x13 x14
> d6 x61 x62 x63 x64
> d8 x81 x82 x83 x84
> d5 x51 x52 x53 x54
> d2 x21 x22 x23 x24
> d4 x41 x42 x43 x44
> d7 x71 x72 x73 x74

=                                                                                                    

> Output matrix Y′ (4×4)
> p1 p2 p3 p4
> y11 y12 y13 y14 y21 y22 y23 y24 y31 y32 y33 y34 y41 y42 y43 y44
> ID c1 c2 c3 c4 p1 p2 p3 p4
> y11 y12 y13 y14
> y21 y22 y23 y24 y31 y32 y33 y34 y41 y42 y43 y44
> ID
> c1
> c2 c3 c4 d1 d2 d3 d4 d5 d6 d7 d8
> w11 w12 w13 w14 w15 w16 w17 w18
> w21 w22 w23 w24 w25 w26 w27 w28 w31 w32 w33 w34 w35 w36 w37 w38 w41 w42 w43 w44 w45 w46 w47 w48
> ID c1 c2 c3 c4 d3 d1 d6 d8 d5 d2 d4 d7
> w13 w11 w16 w18 w15 w12 w14 w17 w23 w21 w26 w28 w25 w22 w24 w27 w33 w31 w36 w38 w35 w32 w34 w37
> w43 w41 w46 w48 w45 w42 w44 w47
> ID c1 c2 c3
> c4

y11 = w11 x11 + w12 x21 + w13 x31 + w14 x41 + w15 x51 + w16 x61 + w17 x71 + w18 x81 y11 = w13 x31 + w11 x11 + w16 x61 + w18 x81 + w15 x51 + w12 x21 + w14 x41 + w17 x71 

Zero activation x Non-zero activation x Structurally redundant weights Structurally redundant activations 

> Y = W X
> Y′ = W′X′ = WX = Y

Fig. 6. Example of computational equivalence in activation co-zero reordering. This reordering preserves the computational results while concentrating originally scattered zeros into more compact regions. 

the final computational results. Leveraging this mathematical equivalence, we propose a clustering-based co-zero activation reordering algorithm. Specifically, given the unrolled activation matrix 

𝑋 col ∈ R𝐷 ×𝐿 . Here, 𝐷 denotes the flattened input dimension of the convolution kernel, and 𝐿 

represents the number of unrolled sliding windows. We first define a zero-indicator matrix as follows: 

𝑍 𝑑,𝑙 =

(

1, 𝑋 col (𝑑, 𝑙 ) = 0,

0, otherwise . (10) where 𝑍 𝑑,𝑙 = 1 indicates that the activation value corresponding to the 𝑑 -th input dimension in the 

𝑙 -th sliding window is zero. Based on this zero-indicator matrix, the zero rate of the 𝑑 -th input dimension is defined as 

𝑟 𝑑 = 1

𝐿 

𝐿 ∑︁ 

𝑙 =1

𝑍 𝑑,𝑙 . (11) This metric represents the proportion of sliding windows in which the 𝑑 -th input dimension is zero, serving as a measure of sparsity for that dimension. Furthermore, to characterize the co-zero relationship between different input dimensions, the co-zero affinity between the 𝑖 -th and 𝑗 -th input dimensions is defined as 

𝐴 𝑖,𝑗 = 1

𝐿 

𝐿 ∑︁ 

𝑙 =1

𝑍 𝑖,𝑙 𝑍 𝑗,𝑙 . (12) Since 𝑍 𝑖,𝑙 𝑍 𝑗,𝑙 = 1 holds only when both the 𝑖 -th and 𝑗 -th input dimensions are zero in the 𝑙 -th sliding window, 𝐴 𝑖,𝑗 represents the empirical co-zero probability, i.e., the proportion of sliding windows where both dimensions are simultaneously zero. A larger 𝐴 𝑖,𝑗 indicates a higher co-zero correlation between these two input dimensions, making them more suitable to be placed adjacently during reordering to maximize the probability of the entire input vector being zero. Based on the co-zero affinity matrix, we employ a greedy strategy to generate a permutation of the input dimensions. Specifically, the strategy sequentially constructs input dimension blocks 

, Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:11 

according to the row capacity of a ReRAM crossbar, where each block corresponds to an input vector mapped onto a single crossbar. For each block, the unassigned input dimension with the highest zero rate is first selected as the seed dimension. At each subsequent iteration, the candidate dimension with the highest composite score is added to the current block. For a candidate dimension 

𝑑 , its composite score with respect to the current block B is defined as 

𝑠 (𝑑 |B) = 1

|B| ∑︁ 𝑖 ∈ B 

𝐴 𝑑,𝑖 + 𝛼𝑟 𝑑 , (13) where 𝛼 is a weighting factor that controls the relative contribution of the candidate dimension’s zero rate to the composite score. This selection process continues until the number of dimensions in the current block reaches the row capacity of the crossbar, after which the next block is constructed in the same manner. Finally, the dimension indices are concatenated in the order in which the blocks are constructed to obtain the input-dimension permutation 𝜋 . Here, 𝜋 = [𝜋 1, 𝜋 2, . . . , 𝜋 𝐷 ]

is an index sequence of length 𝐷 that specifies the reordered arrangement of the original input dimensions. Each element 𝜋 𝑘 denotes the original dimension index placed at the 𝑘 -th position in the reordered sequence. The permutation 𝜋 is then consistently applied to the unfolded activation matrix and its corresponding weight matrix. The complete procedure is presented in Algorithm 1. 

3.3.2 Verification of Computational Equivalence. To verify the computational equivalence of matrix multiplication before and after reordering, let 𝑃 𝜋 denote the permutation matrix corresponding to the permutation sequence 𝜋 . The reordered activation and weight matrices are then expressed as: 

𝑋 ′ 

> col

= 𝑃 𝜋 𝑋 col , 𝑊 ′ 

> col

= 𝑊 col 𝑃 ⊤ 

> 𝜋

, (14) where left-multiplication by 𝑃 𝜋 reorders the input dimensions of the activation matrix. Right-multiplication by 𝑃 ⊤ 

> 𝜋

applies the same index permutation to the corresponding dimensions of the weight matrix. Since the permutation matrix satisfies 𝑃 ⊤ 

> 𝜋

𝑃 𝜋 = 𝐼 𝐷 (where 𝐼 𝐷 is the 𝐷 × 𝐷 identity matrix), the result of the reordered matrix multiplication is given by: 

𝑊 ′

> col

𝑋 ′ 

> col

= 𝑊 col 𝑃 ⊤ 

> 𝜋

𝑃 𝜋 𝑋 col = 𝑊 col 𝑋 col . (15) Therefore, the CAR scheme merely adjusts the mapping order of activations and weights within the ReRAM crossbar without altering the original matrix multiplication results. As illustrated in Fig. 6, this reordering places input dimensions with high co-zero affinity adjacent to one another, creating highly concentrated zero-valued regions within the matrix and increasing the probability of all-zero input vectors. The implementation of the CAR mechanism consists of two stages: offline deployment and online inference. During offline deployment, the weight matrix is first reordered and partitioned according to the permutation index 𝜋 . The partitioning of the reordered matrix is illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Based on the partitioning results, the target crossbars that no longer contribute to effective computation are identified in advance. These redundant crossbars and their associated peripheral circuits are directly pruned during weight mapping, thereby reducing the chip area and power consumption required for deployment. Since weight reordering, redundant crossbar pruning, and weight programming are all completed offline before model deployment, no additional runtime overhead is introduced. During online inference, the partial sums generated by each layer are first accumulated to produce the layer output, which is then passed through a nonlinear activation function to generate the input activations for the next layer. Before executing the next layer, VARA remaps the read addresses of the activation buffer according to the permutation 𝜋 , enabling the activations to be accessed in the permuted order. The reordered activations are then partitioned according to the crossbar size and transmitted to the ReRAM crossbars retained during offline deployment. Since  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:12 Peng Dang et al.

this process modifies only the access order of the activation buffer without requiring explicit data movement, it introduces minimal runtime overhead. Online inference is performed exclusively on the retained crossbars, thereby eliminating redundant crossbar-level computations and their associated power consumption. In summary, while maintaining strict computational equivalence, CAR achieves coarse-grained crossbar-level computation skipping and power optimization with only minimal memory-address remapping overhead. 

Algorithm 1 Clustering-Based Co-Zero Activation Reordering Algorithm 

Require: Unfolded activation matrix Xcol ∈ R𝐷 ×𝐿 , crossbar size 𝑆 , sparsity weight 𝛼 , maximum samples 𝐿 max 

Ensure: Permutation vector 𝜋  

> 1:

Optionally sample 𝐿 𝑠 = min (𝐿, 𝐿 max ) columns from Xcol  

> 2:

Construct zero-indicator matrix Z ∈ { 0, 1}𝐷 ×𝐿 𝑠 from the sampled activation matrix  

> 3:

Compute zero rate 𝑟 𝑑 ← 1

> 𝐿 𝑠

Í𝐿 𝑠  

> 𝑙 =1

𝑍 𝑑,𝑙 for each dimension 𝑑  

> 4:

Compute co-zero affinity matrix A, where 𝐴 𝑖,𝑗 = 1

> 𝐿 𝑠

Í𝐿 𝑠  

> 𝑙 =1

𝑍 𝑖,𝑙 𝑍 𝑗,𝑙  

> 5:

Initialize unused dimension set U ← { 1, 2, . . . , 𝐷 } and permutation list 𝜋 ← ∅  

> 6:

while U ≠ ∅ do  

> 7:

Select seed dimension 𝑑 ∗ ← arg max 𝑑 ∈ U 𝑟 𝑑  

> 8:

Initialize current block B ← { 𝑑 ∗ } and update U ← U \ { 𝑑 ∗ } 

> 9:

Initialize running co-zero sum vector v ← A𝑑 ∗,: 

> 10:

while |B| < 𝑆 and U ≠ ∅ do  

> 11:

Compute candidate clustering scores: 

𝑠 𝑑 ← 1 

> | B |

𝑣 𝑑 + 𝛼𝑟 𝑑 , ∀𝑑 ∈ U  

> 12:

Select next dimension 𝑑 ∗ ← arg max 𝑑 ∈ U 𝑠 𝑑  

> 13:

Update B ← B ∪ { 𝑑 ∗ } and U ← U \ { 𝑑 ∗ } 

> 14:

Update running vector v ← v + A𝑑 ∗,: 

> 15:

end while  

> 16:

Append dimensions in B to 𝜋  

> 17:

end while  

> 18:

Apply 𝜋 to both activation and weight dimensions before crossbar partitioning  

> 19:

return 𝜋 

4 Experimental Evaluation 4.1 Experimental Setup 

4.1.1 Model Training. In this work, we select three representative networks—VGG11, ResNet18, and ResNet34—and train and evaluate them on the CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and Tiny ImageNet datasets, respectively. All experiments are implemented using the PyTorch framework. During training, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum is employed as the optimizer, combined with a cosine annealing schedule to dynamically adjust the learning rate. Model weights are uniformly quantized to 8 bits. To increase the proportion of zero activations in each network, VA-Step or VA-ReLU is adopted as the activation function, and training is conducted under various threshold settings. The key training hyperparameters are summarized in Table 1. 

4.1.2 Hardware Setup. To evaluate the hardware performance of the VARA architecture, we developed a customized simulator based on open-source simulators [6, 11, 45] for simulation analysis. The simulation employs an Ag:Si ReRAM device model at the 22 nm technology node [17]                       

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:13
> Table 1. Hyperparameter Settings for Model Training
> Category Hyperparameter Value
> Optimization & regularization Momentum 0.9 Weight decay 1×10 −4
> Training settings Epochs 300 Batch size 128 Initial learning rate 0.1 Table 2. Hardware Simulation Parameters
> Component Parameter Value
> ReRAM device LRS/HRS 0.1 M Ω/1.7 M Ω
> Read voltage 0.5 V Crossbar array Technology node 22 nm Crossbar size 64 ×64 ADC Resolution 6 bit

and adopts a one-transistor–one-resistor (1T1R) cell structure to construct ReRAM crossbars. During model deployment, the sparse model obtained from VAT training serves as the baseline; the CAR scheme is then applied to reorder activation dimensions and their corresponding weights. Subsequently, matrix partitioning and mapping are performed according to crossbar size constraints, enabling crossbar-level computation skipping during inference. The main hardware parameters are summarized in Table 2. 

4.2 Impact of VAT on Model Accuracy and Activation Sparsity 

This section evaluates the impact of the VAT algorithm on model classification accuracy and ZAR. The conventional Step function at 𝜃 = 0 and the standard ReLU function serve as baselines for VA-Step and VA-ReLU, respectively. Under identical training settings, we analyze the effect of the activation threshold 𝜃 on both model accuracy and activation sparsity. The results are presented in Fig. 7, where ∗ denotes the baseline threshold and † indicates the optimal threshold selected by jointly considering model accuracy and activation sparsity. 

Evaluation Results of VA-Step. As shown in Fig. 7(a)–(c), the ZARs of all three models increase steadily as the activation threshold 𝜃 increases, while model accuracy generally exhibits an initial increase followed by a decline. Specifically, the accuracies of VGG11, ResNet18, and ResNet34 peak at approximately 𝜃 = 0.3 and exceed their corresponding baselines. This indicates that moderately suppressing redundant low-magnitude activations provides a regularization effect that improves model generalization. As the threshold increases further, the ZAR continues to rise, whereas model accuracy begins to decline. Nevertheless, VA-Step preserves accuracy well over a relatively wide range of thresholds. Accordingly, we select 𝜃 = 0.9, 𝜃 = 0.7, and 𝜃 = 0.8 as the optimal thresholds for VGG11, ResNet18, and ResNet34, respectively. Under these optimal settings, the three models achieve ZARs of 90.89%, 84.96%, and 88.73%, respectively, while improving accuracy over their corresponding baselines by 0.16%, 0.20%, and 0.47%, respectively. 

Evaluation Results of VA-ReLU. As illustrated in Fig. 7(d)–(f), the ZAR of VA-ReLU also increases steadily with the activation threshold 𝜃 , but its model accuracy is more sensitive to threshold  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:14 Peng Dang et al.

Figure7          

> (a) VGG11 on CIFAR10 (b) ResNet18 on CIFAR100 (c) ResNet34 on Tiny ImageNet
> (d) VGG11 on CIFAR10 (e) ResNet18 on CIFAR100 (f) ResNet34 on Tiny ImageNet
> Fig. 7. Impact of activation threshold 𝜃 on model accuracy and ZAR. Here, ∗denotes the baseline, and †
> represents the optimal threshold.

variations. For VGG11 and ResNet18, accuracy generally declines as 𝜃 increases; for ResNet34, a marginal improvement occurs only at a small threshold of 𝜃 = 0.1, followed by a continuous decrease. This phenomenon primarily stems from the truncation effect of VA-ReLU on activations. As 𝜃 increases, more sub-threshold activations are zeroed out, including some that still carry meaningful feature information. The loss of this information progressively degrades model accuracy. Accordingly, we select 𝜃 = 0.8, 𝜃 = 0.7, and 𝜃 = 0.5 as the optimal thresholds for the three models, respectively. Under these optimal settings, the models achieve ZARs of 92.58%, 81.66%, and 82.53%, while exhibiting accuracy drops of approximately 1.24%, 2.39%, and 1.46% compared to their corresponding baselines, respectively. Across the six experiments, under the selected thresholds, VAT increases the average ZAR across models to 86.89% while limiting the average accuracy loss to approximately 0.71%. Overall, both VA-Step and VA-ReLU can significantly improve ZAR by adjusting the activation threshold, yet they exhibit distinct accuracy-sparsity trade-offs. VA-Step maintains a wider accuracy retention window and can preserve or even slightly improve model accuracy at high ZAR levels; in contrast, VA-ReLU is more sensitive to threshold variations, with its accuracy declining more markedly as the threshold increases. Since the system performance of VARA depends not only on model accuracy but also on the ZAR, the proportion of all-zero input vectors, and crossbar-level computation skipping opportunities, we do not select the threshold yielding peak accuracy. Instead, we adopt the accuracy-sparsity trade-off points marked with † in the figure as the optimal thresholds. These settings maximize ZAR within an acceptable accuracy loss margin and provide sufficient sparsity for subsequent structured sparsity exploitation and crossbar-level computation skipping. 

4.3 Evaluation of Structured Reshaping Effects on Activation Distributions 

Taking the first layer of each model as an example, this section evaluates the impact of VAT and CAR on activation sparsity and crossbar-level computation skipping. We first visualize the reshaping effects of both methods on activation distributions. Subsequently, we analyze the influence of crossbar size and CAR on the crossbar-level computation skipping ratio under three experimental configurations to validate the effectiveness of transforming element-wise activation sparsity into exploitable structured sparsity.  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:15

Figure8         

> (a) Baseline (b) Baseline with CAR (d) VAT with CAR (c) VAT
> Fig. 8. Visual comparison of activation distributions before and after CAR reordering under different thresh-olds. (a) and (b) show the activation distributions before and after reordering at 𝜃 =0, respectively; (c) and (d) show those at 𝜃 =1.0, respectively.

4.3.1 Visual Analysis of the Synergistic Reshaping of Activation Distributions by VAT and CAR. 

Fig. 8 illustrates the activation distributions of the first layer of VGG11 with the VA-Step activation function for the first input batch under different optimization strategies, where white and blue dots represent zero and nonzero activations, respectively. Fig. 8(a) shows the baseline activation distribution without VAT or CAR. Zero and nonzero activations are interspersed across feature dimensions, exhibiting a pronounced unstructured pattern that hinders the formation of contiguous all-zero regions aligned with the input partitions of ReRAM crossbars. Fig. 8(b) presents the activation distribution after applying CAR reordering alone. By reordering activations based on co-zero correlations among input dimensions, CAR enhances the local clustering of zero activations along the input dimension. However, due to the relatively limited overall ZAR of the baseline model, the existing zero activations are insufficient to support large-scale structured clustering. Consequently, CAR alone fails to generate extensive contiguous all-zero regions. Fig. 8(c) shows the activation distribution after applying VAT alone. By introducing a predefined activation threshold, VAT maps a large number of low-magnitude activations to zero, significantly increasing the overall sparsity of the activation matrix and producing noticeable clusters of zeros. However, some nonzero activations remain scattered across the input dimensions, causing many input partitions to contain a small number of nonzero elements. This dispersion limits the formation of all-zero input vectors. Fig. 8(d) shows the activation distribution obtained by combining VAT and CAR. Building on the high element-wise sparsity induced by VAT, CAR further reorders the input dimensions according to their co-zero correlations. This reordering concentrates nonzero activations within a lower-indexed subset of dimensions and creates large, contiguous all-zero regions across the remaining dimensions. When the activation matrix is partitioned and mapped according to the row capacity of ReRAM crossbars, this structured sparsity pattern significantly increases the probability of producing all-zero input vectors, creating more opportunities for crossbar-level computation skipping. 

4.3.2 Impact of Array Size and CAR on crossbar-Level Computation Skipping Ratio. During offline model deployment, CAR reorders the activation dimensions to consolidate scattered zero activa-tions into contiguous all-zero regions, creating more opportunities for crossbar-level computation skipping. To quantify this benefit, we define the crossbar-level computation skipping ratio as the fraction of all-zero input vectors among all input vectors, since each all-zero input vector corresponds to one skippable crossbar computation. A higher ratio indicates that activation sparsity can be more effectively translated into crossbar-level computation skipping. Fig. 9 presents the crossbar-level computation skipping ratios with and without CAR across different crossbar sizes at the optimal activation threshold.  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:16 Peng Dang et al.

Figure9   

> (a) VA-Step without CAR (b) VA-Step with CAR
> (c) VA-ReLU without CAR (d) VA-ReLU with CAR
> Fig. 9. Crossbar-level computation skipping ratios before and after CAR reordering as a function of crossbar size at the optimal activation threshold. (a) and (b) show the results for VA-Step before and after reordering, respectively; (c) and (d) show the corresponding results for VA-ReLU.

As shown in Fig. 9(a) and (c), without CAR, the crossbar-level computation skipping ratios of all three models decrease rapidly as the crossbar size increases from 16 ×16 to 256 ×256, despite the high ZAR achieved by VAT. For VA-Step, the computation skipping ratios of VGG11 and ResNet18 approach zero at larger crossbar sizes. Although ResNet34 retains some computation skipping opportunities, its skipping ratio also decreases significantly. VA-ReLU exhibits a similar pattern, with the computation skipping ratios of all three models approaching zero at crossbar sizes of 128 ×128 and 256 ×256. These results indicate that, in the absence of structured reordering, scattered nonzero activations make all-zero input vectors extremely difficult to form. Consequently, even a high ZAR cannot be effectively translated into a high crossbar-level computation skipping ratio. As shown in Fig. 9(b) and (d), applying CAR significantly improves the crossbar-level computation skipping ratios for all three models. For VA-Step, even as the crossbar size increases to 256 ×256, the computation skipping ratios of VGG11, ResNet18, and ResNet34 still reach approximately 38.4%, 29.0%, and 42.1%, respectively. For VA-ReLU, at a crossbar size of 256 ×256, the computation skipping ratios of the three models remain at approximately 50.5%, 32.7%, and 33.3%, respectively. Compared to the case without CAR, the improvement introduced by CAR is particularly pronounced at larger crossbar sizes. This indicates that CAR mitigates the constraint imposed by increasing input vector length on the formation of all-zero input vectors, thereby translating a greater portion of activation sparsity into crossbar-level computation skipping. This result can be explained from two perspectives: input-partitioning granularity and activation distribution. When a crossbar has fewer rows, each input vector contains fewer activation elements. Consequently, fewer elements need to be simultaneously zero to form an all-zero input vector, making crossbar-level computation skipping more likely. As the crossbar size increases, the input-vector length also increases, requiring more activation elements to be simultaneously zero and thus making all-zero input vectors more difficult to form. CAR reorders activation dimensions with strong co-zero correlations to concentrate zero activations locally, thereby increasing the probability of forming all-zero input vectors. Although the crossbar-level computation skipping  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:17

Figure10    

> (a) (b)
> (d) (c)
> Fig. 10. Impact of threshold 𝜃 on crossbar and ADC energy consumption in VA-Step and VA-ReLU.

ratio decreases with increasing crossbar size, CAR substantially mitigates this degradation and preserves considerable skipping opportunities at larger crossbar sizes. Based on this crossbar-size sensitivity analysis, a crossbar size of 64 × 64 provides a moderate input partitioning granularity while maintaining a considerable crossbar-level computation skipping ratio across different models. Therefore, it is adopted as the default configuration for the subsequent hardware performance evaluation. 

4.4 Circuit-Level Hardware Performance Evaluation of the VARA Architecture with VAT Only 

As analyzed in Section 2.2, the numerical distribution of input activations directly determines the input voltages applied to ReRAM crossbars and the resulting bitline currents. These electrical characteristics, in turn, affect the dynamic energy consumption of both the crossbars and ADCs. Accordingly, this section evaluates the crossbar and ADC energy consumption under VA-Step and VA-ReLU across different activation thresholds. The conventional Step function and standard ReLU at 𝜃 = 0 serve as baselines, with their respective crossbar and ADC energy consumptions normalized to 100%. The experimental results are presented in Fig. 10. 

Evaluation Results of VA-Step. As shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b), increasing the threshold leads to substantial reductions in both crossbar and ADC energy consumption across all three models when using VA-Step. At the optimal threshold, the crossbar energy consumption for VGG11, ResNet18, and ResNet34 is reduced by approximately 77.25%, 74.18%, and 75.76% relative to the baseline, respectively, while ADC energy consumption decreases by approximately 67.71%, 65.30%, and 66.95%, respectively. These gains primarily stem from the discrete {0, +1} output characteristic of VA-Step. By mapping a large proportion of pre-activations to zero, VA-Step significantly increases the fraction of zero input voltages, thereby reducing effective ReRAM cell conduction and current flow within the crossbar. Concurrently, the lower accumulated bitline current reduces ADC conversion overhead, resulting in simultaneous energy savings for both the crossbar and the ADCs. 

Evaluation Results of VA-ReLU. As illustrated in Fig. 10(c) and (d), VA-ReLU also achieves reduc-tions in both crossbar and ADC energy consumption as the threshold increases. At the optimal  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:18 Peng Dang et al.

Figure11    

> (a) (b)
> (d) (c)
> Fig. 11. Impact of activation threshold 𝜃 on total system energy consumption and energy efficiency with CAR for VA-Step and VA-ReLU.

threshold, the crossbar energy consumption for VGG11, ResNet18, and ResNet34 is reduced by approximately 69.52%, 50.79%, and 44.20% relative to the baseline, respectively, while ADC en-ergy consumption decreases by approximately 51.97%, 37.05%, and 30.45%, respectively. Although VA-ReLU yields significant energy savings across all three models, its overall reduction is less pro-nounced than that of VA-Step. This difference arises because VA-ReLU truncates only sub-threshold activations to zero while preserving positive activations above the threshold. Consequently, the resulting activation sparsity and input voltage modulation are more gradual, leading to weaker suppression of cell conduction and bitline currents compared to VA-Step, leading to comparatively limited energy savings. Across the six experiments, VAT reduces crossbar and ADC energy consumption by an average of 65.28% and 53.24%, respectively, demonstrating its ability to effectively translate algorithm-level activation sparsity into circuit-level energy savings. These savings arise because VAT increases the proportion of zero input voltages applied to ReRAM crossbars, suppressing the conduction currents of the corresponding ReRAM cells and further reducing the bitline current. This simultaneously lowers crossbar computation energy and ADC conversion energy. The experimental results also reveal that, compared to the ADC, the crossbar energy exhibits a more pronounced downward trend as activation sparsity increases. Furthermore, owing to its discrete 0 , +1 output representation, VA-Step achieves more significant and consistent circuit-level energy savings across different models than VA-ReLU. 

4.5 System-Level Performance Evaluation of the VARA Architecture under Synergistic VAT and CAR Optimization 

This section further evaluates the system-level performance of the VARA architecture leveraging the synergy between VAT and CAR. With CAR enabled and all other hardware configurations held constant, systems employing the conventional Step function and standard ReLU at 𝜃 = 0 serve as baselines for VA-Step and VA-ReLU, respectively. The total system energy consumption and energy efficiency under the baseline settings are normalized to 100% and 1 ×, respectively. The experimental results are presented in Fig. 11.  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:19

Evaluation Results of VA-Step. As shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b), with increasing threshold, VA-Step exhibits a consistent trend of decreasing total system energy consumption and improving energy efficiency across all three models. At the optimal threshold, the total system energy consumption for VGG11, ResNet18, and ResNet34 is reduced by approximately 73.16%, 62.80%, and 69.57% relative to the baseline, respectively, while the corresponding system energy efficiency improves to approximately 3.73 ×, 2.69 ×, and 3.29 ×, respectively. These gains are primarily attributed to the discrete {0, +1} output representation of VA-Step. As the threshold increases, more low-magnitude activations are mapped directly to zero, which not only reduces input voltage activity and bitline current in the ReRAM crossbar but also provides greater flexibility for CAR to exploit co-zero reordering opportunities. By grouping input dimensions with strong co-zero correlations into the same input partitions, CAR enables more crossbars to receive all-zero input vectors and allows the corresponding crossbar-level computations to be skipped. Consequently, building on the circuit-level energy savings, VA-Step achieves substantial additional improvements in system-level energy efficiency. 

Evaluation Results of VA-ReLU. As illustrated in Fig. 11(c) and (d), VA-ReLU similarly exhibits a trend of decreasing total system energy consumption and increasing energy efficiency as the threshold rises. Under the optimal threshold setting, the normalized total system energy consump-tion for VGG11, ResNet18, and ResNet34 is reduced by approximately 63.68%, 47.08%, and 44.39% relative to the baseline, respectively, while the corresponding system energy efficiency improves to approximately 2.75 ×, 1.89 ×, and 1.74 ×, respectively. Compared to VA-Step, the system-level optimization achieved by VA-ReLU is relatively limited. This is because VA-ReLU zeros out only sub-threshold activations while preserving continuous positive activations above the threshold, resulting in more moderate improvements in both the ZAR and co-zero clustering. Consequently, CAR yields fewer all-zero input vectors, resulting in fewer crossbar and peripheral circuit opera-tions that can be skipped. Nevertheless, the activation sparsity induced by VA-ReLU can still be effectively leveraged by CAR to yield substantial system-level energy and efficiency gains. Across all six experimental configurations, the synergistic optimization of VAT and CAR reduces the average total system energy consumption by 60.12% and improves the overall energy efficiency by an average of 2.68 ×. These substantial gains demonstrate the high complementarity of the two methods. VAT increases the ZAR at the algorithmic level and directly reduces energy consumption in crossbars and ADCs. Meanwhile, CAR consistently reorders activation dimensions and their corresponding weight mappings to aggregate scattered element-wise sparsity into structured all-zero regions. These regions are aligned with the crossbar granularity and enable crossbar-level computation skipping. Together, they establish a complete optimization pipeline spanning activation sparsity enhancement, structured reordering, and hardware computation skipping, ultimately achieving significant reductions in total system energy consumption and effective improvements in overall energy efficiency. 

4.6 System-Level Energy Breakdown of the VARA Architecture 

This section uses ResNet34 as a representative model to analyze the system-level energy consump-tion breakdown of the VARA architecture, with particular emphasis on evaluating the additional overhead incurred by the IU introduced to support the CAR scheme. Fig. 12 presents the energy consumption shares of individual modules under VA-Step and VA-ReLU, respectively. 

Evaluation Results of VA-Step. As shown in Fig. 12(a), the system energy consumption is primarily contributed by the ADCs and buffers, which account for 61.5% and 19.0% of the total, respectively, summing to 80.5%. The accumulation unit and other peripheral circuits consume 9.2% and 8.6%, respectively, while the crossbar contributes only 1.46%. In contrast, the IU accounts for a mere 0.22%,   

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:20 Peng Dang et al. 1.46% 61.5% 8.6% 19.0% 0.22% 9.2%
> (a) VA-Step
> 0.99% 51.8% 9.7% 25.2% 0.26% 12.0%
> (b) VA-ReLU
> Crossbar ADC Others Buffer Index Unit Accumulation
> Fig. 12. System-level energy breakdown of VARA.

substantially lower than all other hardware modules. Therefore, under the VA-Step configuration, the energy consumption of VARA remains dominated by analog-to-digital conversion and data access operations, and the index-access overhead introduced by the IU is virtually negligible within the overall system energy budget. 

Evaluation Results of VA-ReLU. As shown in Fig. 12(b), the ADC remains the predominant contributor to system energy consumption, accounting for 51.8%. The energy shares of the buffers and the accumulation unit rise to 25.2% and 12.0%, respectively, representing a notable increase over the VA-Step case. The underlying reason is that VA-ReLU retains multi-bit continuous activation values, which enlarges the bit-width for data storage and transfer and consequently increases the overhead of partial-sum accumulation. The other peripheral circuits and the crossbar account for 9.7% and 0.99%, respectively. Notably, the IU consumes a mere 0.26% of the total, indicating that the index-access overhead introduced by CAR is virtually negligible within the overall system energy budget. In summary, the energy share of the IU consistently remains below 0.3%. The underlying reason for this ultralow overhead is that the IU stores not the full activation matrices but rather the permutation indices corresponding to each layer’s activation matrix, whose storage capacity is determined solely by the activation row dimension and does not scale linearly with the total number of matrix elements. During inference, the system needs to read the permutation sequence only once prior to the computation of each layer and remap the read addresses of the activation buffer accordingly, without performing explicit data movement on the activation matrices. Therefore, CAR achieves activation matrix reordering with extremely lightweight hardware overhead, and the introduction of the IU does not offset the energy savings gained by CAR through eliminating redundant crossbar computations. 

4.7 Related Work and Comparison 

4.7.1 Related Work. To more clearly position this work relative to existing studies, Table 3 summa-rizes existing ReRAM-based sparsity exploitation schemes. As shown in Table 3, prior studies have primarily exploited model sparsity through value sparsity enhancement, bit sparsity enhancement, matrix reordering, and runtime computation skipping. However, these methods differ substantially in the optimization stages they address and the hardware granularities at which sparsity is exploited. Specifically, CAP [22], PIM-Prune [9], and FORMS [41] primarily increase the proportion of zero-valued weights through pruning, polarization, or quantization to enhance element-wise sparsity. Nevertheless, these methods focus solely on increasing the number of zero-valued elements and lack a structured reordering mechanism that aggregates scattered zeros into contiguous zero-valued re-gions. Consequently, their computation-skipping granularity is limited to crossbar rows or columns.  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:21

Table 3. Comparison of VARA with Existing Sparsity Exploitation Schemes for ReRAM-Based Accelerators                                                                                     

> Related Work Sparsity Target Sparsity Granularity BSE ESE MR GCR Skipping Granularity
> EZC [32] Weight Value-level ✗✗✓✗OU-row CAP [22] Weight Value-level ✗✓✗✗Crossbar/column PIM-Prune [9] Weight Value-level ✗✓✗✗Crossbar-row/column SME [23] Weight Bit-level ✓✗✓✗Bit-sliced crossbar SRE [40] Weight/Activation Value-level ✗✗✓✗OU-row/column FORMS [41] Weight/Activation Value-level ✗✓✗✗Segment BitS-Net [18] Weight/Activation Bit-level ✓✗✗✗Bit ERA-BS [24] Weight/Activation Bit-level ✓✗✗✗Crossbar-row/column CompRRAE [7] Activation Value-level ✗✗✗✗MAC operation RapPIM [16] Activation Value-level ✗✗✗✗Activation-row/column
> VARA Activation Value-level ✗✓✓✓Crossbar
> BSE: bit-sparsity enhancement; ESE: element-sparsity enhancement; MR: matrix reordering; GCR: global clustering-based reordering.

In contrast, SME [23], BitS-Net [18], and ERA-BS [24] focus on increasing the proportion of zero bits in the binary representations of weights or activations and reduce computational overhead through bit slicing, sparse encoding, or low-order bit skipping. Although these methods effectively reduce bit-level operations, their optimizations remain confined to the binary representation of data. Consequently, they cannot readily create all-zero regions, making it impossible to skip entire ReRAM crossbars. To improve the efficiency of exploiting unstructured sparsity in hardware, EZC [32], SME [23], and SRE [40] employ row/column compression and local dynamic reorganization to exclude all-zero rows or columns within operation units (OUs) from the computational mapping, thereby reducing redundant operations. However, these methods neither actively increase the proportion of zero-valued elements nor provide structured reordering across the global mapping. Consequently, their computation-skipping granularity remains limited to local rows or columns within a crossbar. CompRRAE [7] employs runtime activation-range estimation to terminate the remaining MAC operations whose contributions to the final output are limited. However, it neither modifies the activation distribution nor reorders the activation matrix. RapPIM [16] identifies and prunes insen-sitive activation rows or columns based on the number of zeros they contain, while simultaneously skipping partial low-bit computations. This method exploits the existing activation sparsity of the model but neither explicitly increases the ZAR nor reorders the activation matrix. Therefore, its computation-skipping granularity is limited to activation rows or columns. In summary, existing studies typically address only a subset of the stages involved in sparsity enhancement, matrix reordering, and computation skipping. They therefore struggle to simultaneously increase the ZAR and organize scattered zero-valued elements into structured redundancy aligned with the physical structure of ReRAM, thereby limiting the opportunities for crossbar-level computation skipping. 

4.7.2 Comparison. 

Comparison of Bitline Current Modulation via Conductance and Voltage. Prior work SARA [14, 15] reduces bitline current through state-aware training (SAT), which maps a larger fraction of weights to the HRS of ReRAM devices. In contrast, the VAT proposed in this work maps a larger fraction of activations to zero input voltage to reduce bitline current. To compare the energy-saving effects of these two approaches, Table 4 summarizes the relevant results. To exclude the additional energy  

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:22 Peng Dang et al.

Table 4. Comparison of VARA with SARA [14, 15] and RapPIM [16]                                               

> Related work Evaluation dataset Accuracy change Energy reduction EE gain Array ADC/SA System
> SARA (BNN + SAT) MNIST, SVHN, CIFAR10 ↓0.38% 40.53% 36.78% ––
> VARA (VA-Step) CIFAR10, CIFAR100, Tiny ImageNet ↑0.28 %76.05% 66.98% 57.37% 2.35 ×
> SARA (8-bit SLC) MNIST, SVHN, CIFAR10 0.00% 11.67% 9.17% ––
> VARA (VA-ReLU) CIFAR10, CIFAR100, Tiny ImageNet ↓1.70% 54.84% 39.82% 27.33% 1.39 ×
> RapPIM (Average) CIFAR10 ↓1.85% ––44.82% –
> VARA (Average) CIFAR10, CIFAR100, Tiny ImageNet ↓0.71 %74.53% 66.40% 60.12% 2.68 ×

EE: energy efficiency. 

savings contributed by CAR, we report only the hardware energy consumption of VARA with VAT enabled for comparison with SARA. As shown in Table 4, for BNNs, SARA reduces crossbar and sense amplifier (SA) energy consumption by 40.53% and 36.78%, respectively. In comparison, VARA with VA-Step achieves 76.05% and 66.98% reductions in crossbar and ADC energy consumption, respectively, on more complex datasets. Under the 8-bit setting, SARA reduces crossbar and SA energy consumption by 11.67% and 9.17%, respectively, whereas VARA with VA-ReLU achieves 54.84% and 39.82% reductions in crossbar and ADC energy consumption, respectively. Moreover, since SARA does not incorporate crossbar-level computation skipping, its energy savings are confined to the crossbar and readout circuitry, limiting further reductions in system-level energy consumption. The above performance differences can be explained by the current characteristics of ReRAM cells. For a ReRAM cell with conductance 𝐺 𝑖 under an applied input voltage 𝑉 𝑖 , the cell current is given by 𝐼 𝑖 = 𝑉 𝑖 𝐺 𝑖 . SARA reduces 𝐺 𝑖 by mapping a larger fraction of weights to the HRS. However, as long as the input voltage remains nonzero, an HRS cell still produces a finite read current. Therefore, this approach can reduce only the conduction current of the ReRAM cell and cannot skip the corresponding computation. In contrast, VARA maps more activations to zero, making the corresponding input voltage 𝑉 𝑖 zero and eliminating the read current of the associated ReRAM cell. More importantly, when an entire input activation vector is zero, VARA can directly skip the corresponding crossbar-level computation, thereby saving substantial energy in the peripheral circuits. Consequently, VARA reduces energy consumption by both lowering the conduction current of ReRAM cells and enabling crossbar computation skipping, resulting in significantly greater energy savings than those achieved by solely modulating device resistance states. 

Comparison of Computation Skipping by Exploiting Activation Sparsity. Table 4 summarizes the comparison between VARA and RapPIM [16], a state-of-the-art (SOTA) scheme for sparse-activation optimization. For this comparison, VARA’s hardware performance is evaluated with VAT and CAR jointly enabled. As shown in Table 4, RapPIM reports a 44.82% reduction in system energy consumption, whereas VARA achieves a reduction of 60.12%, exceeding RapPIM by 15.30 percentage points. In terms of model accuracy, the five models evaluated by RapPIM on CIFAR10 incur an average accuracy loss of 1.85%. By contrast, VARA incurs an average accuracy loss of only 0.71% on more complex datasets (CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and Tiny ImageNet), while achieving a 2.68 ×

improvement in energy efficiency. These results demonstrate that VARA can effectively translate activation sparsity into system-level energy savings even on more complex datasets. The above performance differences primarily arise from how the two approaches generate, structure, and exploit sparsity in hardware. As shown in Table 3, RapPIM counts the zeros in 

> , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026.

VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:23 

each row and column of the activation matrix at runtime and prunes activation rows or columns that have little impact on model accuracy. However, RapPIM neither actively increases the ZAR nor structurally reorders the activation matrix. Consequently, the number of rows or columns that can be pruned is constrained by the original activation distribution, while the granularity of computation skipping is largely limited to activation rows or columns. In contrast, VARA jointly optimizes activation sparsity enhancement, structural reorganization, and computation skipping. First, VAT increases the ZAR, creating more zero values for subsequent computation skipping. Building on this enhanced sparsity, CAR clusters scattered, unstructured zeros into contiguous all-zero regions, allowing the corresponding ReRAM crossbars to be pruned in their entirety as redundant modules. Therefore, by combining a higher ZAR with coarser-grained computation skipping, VARA achieves significantly greater system-level energy savings than RapPIM. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper proposes VARA, a voltage-aware ReRAM accelerator designed to exploit activation sparsity. First, the proposed VAT actively suppresses low-magnitude activations to enhance activa-tion sparsity at the model level. Subsequently, the proposed CAR scheme leverages the co-zero correlation across different activation dimensions to jointly reorder the activation matrix and its corresponding weight mapping, aggregating scattered zeros into contiguous all-zero regions, thereby transforming unstructured element-wise activation sparsity into structured redundancy exploitable by the hardware. Building upon this, VARA reduces system energy consumption by skipping crossbar computations corresponding to all-zero inputs. Experimental results demonstrate that, with only marginal model accuracy degradation, VARA reduces the total system energy consumption by 60.12% on average and improves the system energy efficiency by 2.68 × on average compared to the baseline, fully validating the effectiveness of the proposed approach. 

References 

[1] Muhammad Ahmadi and Won Namgoong. 2015. Comparator power minimization analysis for SAR ADC using multiple comparators. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 62, 10 (2015), 2369–2379. [2] Tanner Andrulis, Joel S Emer, and Vivienne Sze. 2023. Raella: Reforming the arithmetic for efficient, low-resolution, and low-loss analog pim: No retraining required!. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) . 1–16. [3] Aayush Ankit, Izzat El Hajj, Sai Rahul Chalamalasetti, Geoffrey Ndu, Martin Foltin, R. Stanley Williams, Paolo Faraboschi, Wen-mei W Hwu, John Paul Strachan, Kaushik Roy, and Dejan S. Milojicic. 2019. PUMA: A Programmable Ultra-efficient Memristor-based Accelerator for Machine Learning Inference. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) . 715–731. [4] Abhiroop Bhattacharjee and Priyadarshini Panda. 2023. Switchx: Gmin-gmax switching for energy-efficient and robust implementation of binarized neural networks on reram xbars. ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems 28, 4 (2023), 1–21. [5] Peiyu Chen, Meng Wu, Yufei Ma, Le Ye, and Ru Huang. 2023. RIMAC: An Array-level ADC/DAC-Free ReRAM-Based In-Memory DNN Processor with Analog Cache and Computation. In 28th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC) . 1–6. [6] Pai-Yu Chen, Xiaochen Peng, and Shimeng Yu. 2017. NeuroSim+: An integrated device-to-algorithm framework for benchmarking synaptic devices and array architectures. In IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) .6.1.1–6.1.4. [7] Xizi Chen, Jingyang Zhu, Jingbo Jiang, and Chi-Ying Tsui. 2019. CompRRAE: RRAM-based convolutional neural network accelerator with r educed computations through ar untime a ctivation e stimation. In Proceedings of the 24th Asia and South Pacific design automation conference (ASP-DAC) . 133–139. [8] Teyuh Chou, Wei Tang, Jacob Botimer, and Zhengya Zhang. 2019. CASCADE: Connecting RRAMs to Extend Analog Dataflow In An End-To-End In-Memory Processing Paradigm. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) . 114–125. [9] Chaoqun Chu, Yanzhi Wang, Yilong Zhao, Xiaolong Ma, Shaokai Ye, Yunyan Hong, Xiaoyao Liang, Yinhe Han, and Li Jiang. 2020. PIM-prune: Fine-grain DCNN pruning for crossbar-based process-in-memory architecture. In ACM/IEEE 

, Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. XXX:24 Peng Dang et al. 

Design Automation Conference (DAC) . 1–6. [10] Peng Dang, Bin Huang, and Huawei Li. 2025. A ReRAM-Based Adaptive Binary Neural Network Accelerator for Efficient Inference. In International Symposium of Electronics Design Automation (ISEDA) . 108–113. [11] Xiangyu Dong, Cong Xu, Yuan Xie, and Norman P Jouppi. 2012. Nvsim: A circuit-level performance, energy, and area model for emerging nonvolatile memory. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 31, 7 (2012), 994–1007. [12] Yiwen Geng, Bin Gao, Qingtian Zhang, Wenqiang Zhang, Peng Yao, Yue Xi, Yudeng Lin, Junren Chen, Jianshi Tang, Huaqiang Wu, et al. 2021. An on-chip layer-wise training method for RRAM based computing-in-memory chips. In 

Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) . 248–251. [13] Zhiwang Guo, Jingwen Jiang, Deyang Chen, Jinbei Fang, Jianguo Yang, Jun Han, Xiaoyong Xue, and Xiaoyang Zeng. 2025. EF-CIM: An Endurance Friendly CIM Accelerator Using Embedded NVM With Bit-Aware Wear Leveling for Efficient Light-Weight On-Chip Training in Edge Devices. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 

72, 9 (2025), 4697–4709. [14] Yintao He, Ying Wang, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. 2021. Saving energy of RRAM-based neural accelerator through state-aware computing. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 41, 7 (2021), 2115–2127. [15] Yintao He, Ying Wang, Xiandong Zhao, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. 2020. Towards state-aware computation in ReRAM neural networks. In ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) . 1–6. [16] Xikun Jiang, Zhaoyan Shen, Siqing Sun, Ping Yin, Zhiping Jia, Lei Ju, Zhiyong Zhang, and Dongxiao Yu. 2023. Runtime row/column activation pruning for ReRAM-based processing-in-memory DNN accelerators. In IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer Aided Design (ICCAD) . 1–9. [17] Sung Hyun Jo, Ting Chang, Idongesit Ebong, Bhavitavya B Bhadviya, Pinaki Mazumder, and Wei Lu. 2010. Nanoscale memristor device as synapse in neuromorphic systems. Nano letters 10, 4 (2010), 1297–1301. [18] Foroozan Karimzadeh, Jong-Hyeok Yoon, and Arijit Raychowdhury. 2022. BitS-Net: Bit-sparse deep neural network for energy-efficient RRAM-based compute-in-memory. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 69, 5 (2022), 1952–1961. [19] Hyeonuk Kim, Youngbeom Jung, and Lee-Sup Kim. 2024. ADC-Free ReRAM-Based In-Situ Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Binary Neural Networks. IEEE Trans. Comput. 73, 2 (2024), 353–365. [20] Hyungjun Kim, Yulhwa Kim, Sungju Ryu, and Jae-Joon Kim. 2020. Algorithm/hardware co-design for in-memory neural network computing with minimal peripheral circuit overhead. In ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) . 1–6. [21] Weitao Li, Pengfei Xu, Yang Zhao, Haitong Li, Yuan Xie, and Yingyan Lin. 2020. Timely: Pushing Data Movements And Interfaces In Pim Accelerators Towards Local And In Time Domain. In ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) . 832–845. [22] Ling Liang, Lei Deng, Yueling Zeng, Xing Hu, Yu Ji, Xin Ma, Guoqi Li, and Yuan Xie. 2018. Crossbar-aware neural network pruning. IEEE Access 6 (2018), 58324–58337. [23] Fangxin Liu, Wenbo Zhao, Zhezhi He, Zongwu Wang, Yilong Zhao, Tao Yang, Jingnai Feng, Xiaoyao Liang, and Li Jiang. 2021. SME: ReRAM-based sparse-multiplication-engine to squeeze-out bit sparsity of neural network. In IEEE 39th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD) . 417–424. [24] Fangxin Liu, Wenbo Zhao, Zongwu Wang, Yongbiao Chen, Xiaoyao Liang, and Li Jiang. 2023. Era-bs: Boosting the efficiency of reram-based pim accelerator with fine-grained bit-level sparsity. IEEE Trans. Comput. 73, 9 (2023), 2320–2334. [25] Haikun Liu, Jiahong Xu, Xiaofei Liao, Hai Jin, Yu Zhang, and Fubing Mao. 2022. A Simulation Framework for Memristor-Based Heterogeneous Computing Architectures. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 41, 12 (2022), 5476–5488. [26] Qi Liu, Bin Gao, Peng Yao, Dong Wu, Junren Chen, Yachuan Pang, Wenqiang Zhang, Yan Liao, Cheng-Xin Xue, Wei-Hao Chen, et al. 2020. 33.2 A fully integrated analog ReRAM based 78.4 TOPS/W compute-in-memory chip with fully parallel MAC computing. In IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC) . 500–502. [27] Adnan Mehonic and Anthony J Kenyon. 2022. Brain-inspired computing needs a master plan. Nature 604, 7905 (2022), 255–260. [28] Zhihang Qian, Shengzhe Yan, Zhuoyu Dai, Zeyu Guo, Zhaori Cong, Yifan He, Chunmeng Dou, Feng Zhang, Jinshan Yue, and Yongpan Liu. 2025. An RRAM-Based Computing-in-Memory Macro With Low-Power Readout/Hold Circuits and Activation Differential Strategy for AdderNet. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 33, 7 (2025), 2029–2033. [29] Haotong Qin, Ruihao Gong, Xianglong Liu, Mingzhu Shen, Ziran Wei, Fengwei Yu, and Jingkuan Song. 2020. Forward and Backward Information Retention for Accurate Binary Neural Networks. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 2247–2256. , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026. VARA: A Voltage-Aware ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Energy-Efficient Computing XXX:25 

[30] A. Sebastian, M. Le Gallo, R. Khaddam-Aljameh, and E. Eleftheriou. 2020. Memory devices and applications for in-memory computing. Nature Nanotechnology 15 (2020), 529–544. [31] Ali Shafiee, Anirban Nag, Naveen Muralimanohar, Rajeev Balasubramonian, John Paul Strachan, Miao Hu, R. Stanley Williams, and Vivek Srikumar. 2016. ISAAC: A Convolutional Neural Network Accelerator with In-Situ Analog Arithmetic in Crossbars. In ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) . 14–26. [32] Hoon Shin, Rihae Park, Seung Yul Lee, Yeonhong Park, Hyunseung Lee, and Jae W Lee. 2022. Effective zero compression on ReRAM-based sparse DNN accelerators. In Proceedings of the 59th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) .949–954. [33] Linghao Song, Xuehai Qian, Hai Li, and Yiran Chen. 2017. PipeLayer: A Pipelined ReRAM-Based Accelerator for Deep Learning. In IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) . 541–552. [34] Tao Song, Xiaoming Chen, Xiaoyu Zhang, and Yinhe Han. 2021. BRAHMS: Beyond conventional RRAM-based neural network accelerators using hybrid analog memory system. In 2021 58th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) . 1033–1038. [35] Samuel D Spetalnick, Muya Chang, Brian Crafton, Win-San Khwa, Yu-Der Chih, Meng-Fan Chang, and Arijit Ray-chowdhury. 2022. A 40nm 64kb 26.56 tops/w 2.37 mb/mm 2 rram binary/compute-in-memory macro with 4.23 x improvement in density and> 75% use of sensing dynamic range. In IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC) . 1–3. [36] Xiaoyu Sun, Shihui Yin, Xiaochen Peng, Rui Liu, Jae-sun Seo, and Shimeng Yu. 2018. XNOR-RRAM: A scalable and parallel resistive synaptic architecture for binary neural networks. In Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) . 1423–1428. [37] Chen-Yang Tsai, Chin-Fu Nien, Tz-Ching Yu, Hung-Yu Yeh, and Hsiang-Yun Cheng. 2021. RePIM: Joint Exploitation of Activation and Weight Repetitions for In-ReRAM DNN Acceleration. In ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) . 589–594. [38] Zihan Xu, Mingbao Lin, Jianzhuang Liu, Jie Chen, Ling Shao, Yue Gao, Yonghong Tian, and Rongrong Ji. 2021. ReCU: Reviving the Dead Weights in Binary Neural Networks. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . 5178–5188. [39] Zheyu Yan, Yifan Qin, Wujie Wen, Xiaobo Sharon Hu, and Yiyu Shi. 2023. Improving realistic worst-case performance of nvcim dnn accelerators through training with right-censored gaussian noise. In IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer Aided Design (ICCAD) . 1–9. [40] Tzu-Hsien Yang, Hsiang-Yun Cheng, Chia-Lin Yang, I-Ching Tseng, Han-Wen Hu, Hung-Sheng Chang, and Hsiang-Pang Li. 2019. Sparse reram engine: Joint exploration of activation and weight sparsity in compressed neural networks. In Proceedings of the 46th International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) . 236–249. [41] Geng Yuan, Payman Behnam, Zhengang Li, Ali Shafiee, Sheng Lin, Xiaolong Ma, Hang Liu, Xuehai Qian, Mahdi Nazm Bojnordi, Yanzhi Wang, et al. 2021. Forms: Fine-grained polarized reram-based in-situ computation for mixed-signal dnn accelerator. In ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) . 265–278. [42] Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. 2016. Understanding Deep Learning Requires Rethinking Generalization. arXiv:1611.03530 [43] Chenguang Zhang, Zhihang Yuan, Xingchen Li, and Guangyu Sun. 2024. Algorithm-hardware co-design for Energy-Efficient A/D conversion in ReRAM-based accelerators. In Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) . 1–6. [44] Wenqiang Zhang, Xiaochen Peng, Huaqiang Wu, Bin Gao, Hu He, Youhui Zhang, Shimeng Yu, and He Qian. 2019. Design guidelines of RRAM based neural-processing-unit: A joint device-circuit-algorithm analysis. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Design Automation Conference (DAC) . 1–6. [45] Zhenhua Zhu, Hanbo Sun, Tongxin Xie, Yu Zhu, Guohao Dai, Lixue Xia, Dimin Niu, Xiaoming Chen, Xiaobo Sharon Hu, Yu Cao, Yuan Xie, Huazhong Yang, and Yu Wang. 2023. MNSIM 2.0: A Behavior-Level Modeling Tool for Processing-In-Memory Architectures. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 42, 11 (2023), 4112–4125. , Vol. X, No. X, Article XXX. Publication date: May 2026.