Low-level optimizations in high-level HDLs:
Is there a benefit?
Oliver Keszocze1[0000-0003-2033-6153], Tjark Petersen2[0000-0002-0239-511X],
Arved Friedemann3[0000-0001-7252-264X], and Matthias Bo
Stuart2[0000-0003-0809-530X]
1 Computer Engineering, TU Clausthal, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany
oliver.keszoecze@tu-clausthal.de
2 Embedded Systems Engineering, Technical University of Denmark,
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
tjape@dtu.dk, mbst@dtu.dk
3 Independent Researcher
Hamburg, Germany
arved.friedemann@stoppe.de
Abstract. This paper explores the applicability of functional program-
ming to the design of Application-specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs).
We investigate the impact of designing ASICs using high-level, abstract
Hardware Description Language (HDL) features versus employing low-
level optimizations on the area of the synthesized circuits. The aim is to
determine whether using low-level optimizations is beneficial and, if so,
whether it is worth the added implementation effort.
To carry out the investigation, we implement an unsigned bit-serial
multiply-accumulate (MAC) unit in 16 different configurations using the
functional HDL Clash. We make use of both low-level bit-manipulation
techniques as well as Clash’s high-level constructs for circuit design.
The experimental evaluation shows that some high-level constructs of
Clash have negligible influence on the resulting circuit size, suggesting
that using the full power of functional programming is a viable approach
to hardware design. To evaluate the impact of the used HDL itself,
we also implemented versions of the MAC in Verilog. The experiments
clearly show that there seems to be an inherent overhead in using Clash
compared to Verilog code written by a seasoned engineer.
1
Introduction and Related Work
A major concern when using higher levels of abstraction for the description of
circuits is that the abstractions add logic overhead to the circuit. Very little
knowledge exists in the form of measurements or experiments that support or
contradict this claim. This paper provides such knowledge by investigating the
Application-specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) implementation of a tiny but
non-trivial coprocessor described in a high-level functional programming lan-
guage with and without various low-level optimizations.
arXiv:2609.37021v1  [cs.AR]  29 Sep 2026


2
Keszocze, Petersen, Friedemann, and Stuart
Many different modern Hardware Description Languages (HDLs) have been
proposed, many of which are either implemented as a framework or as a Domain-
Specific Language (DSL) in an all-purpose programming language (e.g., Chisel
and SpinalHDL for Scala [1, 2] or MyHDL and Amaranth for Python [3, 4]) or as
an extension of an existing programming language (e.g., Clash [5] for Haskell).4
All of them allow describing and/or generating hardware in more flexible and
abstract ways than when using Verilog or VHDL.
Chisel has been proven to be a language that is capable of realizing large
System-on-Chips (SoCs) via the Rocket Chip project [6]. With the diplomacy
framework, there is a tool that allows to negotiate parameters between individual
Chisel generators [7] while staying entirely in the host language Scala, allowing
for a highly integrated design process. There is very little literature on Chisel
being used for small designs that perform low-level bit operations (see [8] for a
paper presenting initial ideas on smaller designs and building blocks and [9] for
a study similar to the one presented in this paper but targeting FPGAs).
The programming style for Chisel is, as in the host language Scala, a mixture
between imperative and functional programming. The language Clash is fully
embracing the functional approach: based on the pure functional programming
language Haskell, it greatly raises the level of abstraction that can be used when
describing hardware in it. According to the documentation [10], Clash will not
introduce any logic overhead:
What is always important to remember is that [...] the compiler will
never infer/invent more logic than what is specified in the circuit de-
scription. (emphasis theirs)
The high level of abstraction in Clash code, and to a certain extend in Chisel as
well, may give rise to the impression that actually a high-level synthesis (HLS)
is carried out. This is not the case. Consequently, this paper does not deal with
the issue of overhead introduced by HLS with respect to RTL.
Although Clash is not as widely used as Chisel, it has seen some interest
in implementing processors in it. There are fully verified RISC-V implementa-
tions [11] and even a textbook on retrocomputing that re-implements multiple
classic processors [12].
The authors are not aware of any publications describing the usage of Clash
to implement small designs using manual low-level optimizations.
The design used as a working example in this paper is an unsigned integer
bit-serial multiply-accumulate (MAC) unit written in Clash. The aim is to im-
plement it as area-efficient as possible. This paper will investigate how different
levels of abstraction will impact the size of the synthesized design and will also
compare these findings against hand-written Verilog versions of the MAC to
investigate the impact of the HDL used.
4 The interested reader is referred to the awesome-hdl GitHub repository at https:
//github.com/drom/awesome-hdl that hosts a curated list of “amazingly awesome
hardware description language projects.”


Low-level optimizations in high-level HDLs: Is there a benefit?
3
2
The Clash HDL
Clash is a functional programming language for circuit design based on the func-
tional programming language Haskell. It models combinatorial circuits as pure
functions of type f : A →B where A and B are finite sets. The corresponding
Clash notation is f :: A -> B. Very few restrictions apply in order for Clash to
be able to synthesize code into either Verilog, SystemVerilog or VHDL; mainly
that every data type needs to be finite and that recursions are statically known
to terminate.
A simple implementation of computing the parity bit of a vector of n bits in
Clash is given by
parityBit :: Vec n Bit -> Bit
parityBit v = fold xor v
The fold function creates a tree structure of xor operations of logarithmic
depths in order to minimize the delay. One can see that Clash uses a high level
of abstraction that allows the developer to clearly express the intent and, hence,
focus on the design and not technical details.
Sequential circuits are modeled using the data type Signal dom a. It repre-
sents an infinite stream of values of type a in some clock domain dom.5 When
using this data type, Clash will generate the required registers to store the values.
Clash will also generate clock, reset and enable signals based on the domain dom.
When working with multiple clock domains, Clash effectively prevents accidental
clock domain crossings.
Clash comes bundled with data types that cover the common use cases: bit-
vectors of arbitrary size n (BitVector n), (Un-)Signed integers of bit-width n
(Unsigned n/Signed n) as well as vectors of length n storing arbitrary data of
type a (Vec n a). Values that come with a valid status can be modeled via the
Maybe a data type where Just 4 is a valid integer and Nothing indicates the
absence of a valid value. This data type prevents the accidental use of bits that
do not contain valid data.
Clash is very strict with respect to type checking. Even if two types have the
same bit-representation, they can not be assigned to each other. The designer
has to explicitly cast between the types.
As the types are checked at compile time, no logic overhead is generated in
the Verilog or VHDL files.
There are two main approaches when implementing hardware in Clash as
discussed in the following two sections.
2.1
Mealy Machines
One method for implementing sequential circuits is to model them as a Mealy
Machine [13]. This classical approach makes use two functions T and G, the
5 Concrete types in Clash have to start with a capital letter. A small letter indicates
a placeholder for types, similar to generics in Scala.


4
Keszocze, Petersen, Friedemann, and Stuart
transition and output function, respectively. In Clash, a coalesced function that
combines both functions in one is employed instead. Given a function f of type f
:: s -> i -> (s,o) mapping the current state of type s and the current input
of type i to a tuple consisting of the new state and the Mealy Machine’s output
of type o. Clash provides the mealy function of type
mealy :: (s -> i -> (s, o)) -> s -> Signal dom i -> Signal dom o
that transforms such a coalesced transition/output function f together with the
initial state to a circuit implementing the Mealy machine. As an example consider
the following Mealy machine that detect runs of consecutive 1’s of length greater
than three:6
detectRun :: Int -> Bit -> (Int, Bool)
detectRun count b =
if b == 1
then (count + 1, count + 1 > 3)
else (0, False)
circuit :: Signal dom Int -> Signal dom Bool
circuit = mealy detectRun 0
No manual definition of registers that store the internal state is necessary. Note
that f is a purely combinatorial function/circuit.
2.2
State Monad-based Hardware
Being a functional programming language, Haskell and, by extension, Clash,
does not have a native concept of mutable state. This is why the state was ex-
plicitly passed to the Mealy machine in the previous section. To avoid this and
to write code that looks like the “conventional” imperative programming style,
Haskell/Clash makes use of the so-called state monad and provides a correspond-
ing mealyS function.
We omit the technical details here and only point out that using a state
monad-based programming approach allows describing hardware in a way that
often more closely resembles the algorithmic description of the algorithm the
hardware should implement, making the code easier to understand and maintain.
A state monad-based implementation of the previous example is given by the
following code.
detectRunMonad :: Int -> State Int Bool
detectRunMonad i = do
if i == 1
then (modify' (+1))
else (put 0)
6 All shown codes examples are simplified or/and have parts omitted for didactic
purposes. The full code of the presented MAC is available on GitHub.


Low-level optimizations in high-level HDLs: Is there a benefit?
5
cnt <- get
return $ cnt > 3
circuitMonad :: Signal dom Int -> Signal dom Bool
circuitMonad = mealyS detectRunMonad 0
3
Sequential Arithmetic
Digital multipliers are well-studied circuits with a great amount of variation in
designs and implementations seeking to optimize for one or more of area, speed,
or power-consumption [14]. Given an unsigned n-bit multiplicand X, and an
unsigned m-bit multiplier Y , their product is given by as
X · Y =
 n−1
X
i=0
xi2i
!
·


m−1
X
j=0
yj2j

=
n−1
X
i=0
n−1
X
j=0
xi · yj · 2i+j.
(1)
The bit-wise product xi·yj, is realized by a logic and-operation, while the scaling
2i+j is a matter of bit-shifting or multiplexing. In a low-resource implementation,
registers are used to hold each of the factors and the partial product. A single
full-adder is used to iteratively calculate the partial sum of a single bit of the
partial product, a bit-wise product of one bit from each operand, and the carry
from the previous iteration.
This is illustrated in Algorithm 1, where the outer loop ranges over the bits
of Y (we refer to this as a “round”) and the inner loop ranges over the bits of
X. The bit-wise product xi ·yj is computed by an and-operation. The new value
of the current product bit is then the sum of the bit-wise product, the current
product bit and the incoming carry.
After each round, the carry is propagated to the next product bit; which is
possible because that bit is known to be zero. This is done by the endRound
method (line 10). The calls to advanceX/Y (lines 8 and 11) will be explained in
Section 4.4. For now, consider them to be no-operations.
An exemplary calculation for X = 6 and Y = 3 is presented in the left part
of Table 1.
The “moving parts”, i.e., steps that render themselves amendable for design
choices, will be discussed in the next section. When applicable, those moving
parts are highlighted in blue in Algorithm 1.
The sequential accumulating step following the sequential multiplication does
not introduce further optimization potential and, hence, is omitted for readabil-
ity.
4
Implementation
The MAC’s implementation features a n-bit and an m-bit input for the operands,
a n + m-bit input for manually (pre-)setting the accumulator’s value and enable


6
Keszocze, Petersen, Friedemann, and Stuart
Data: Multiplicand and multiplier x, y of width n and m, respectively
1 carry, product ←0
// m partial products/rounds
2 for roundCtr ←0 to m −1 do
// n bit positions within X
3
for xCtr ←0 to n −1 do
// The arithmetic part
4
a ←getXBit(xCtr) ∧getYBit(roundCtr)
5
p ←getProdBit(roundCtr, xCtr)
6
(carry, s) ←FullAdder(a, p, carry)
// Updating the product
7
setProdBit(roundCtr, xCtr, s)
8
advanceX();
9
end
10
endRound(carry, xCtr, roundCtr)
11
advanceY()
12
carry ←0
// Reset carry
13 end
14 return product
Algorithm 1: Abstract view on the sequential multiplication.
index-based
rotation-based
x
y cin product cout product′
x
y cin product cout product′
P
110 11 0
00000
0
00000
110 11 0
00000
0
00000
P
110 11 0
00000
0
00010
011 11 0
00000
0
00001
P
110 11 0
00010
0
00110
101 11 0
10000
0
10001
E
0
00110
0
00110
0
11000
0
11000
P
110 11 0
00110
0
00110
110 01 0
00011
0
00011
P
110 11 0
00110
1
00010
011 01 0
10001
1
10000
P
110 11 1
00010
1
00010
101 01 1
01000
1
01000
E
1
00010
1
10010
1
00100
1
00101
E’
00010
1
10010
Table 1: The computation carried out by Algorithm 1 for X = 6 = 1102 and
Y = 3 = 112 for the conventional, indexing-based data access (left) and the
rotation-based data access (right). The bits used in each step are underlined. To
help to understand the rotation-based method, the least-significant bits of x and
the product are highlighted in bold. The type of operation carried out in each
row corresponds to the algorithm as follows: Product step (lines 3–8) and End
of round step (lines 10–12).


Low-level optimizations in high-level HDLs: Is there a benefit?
7
1
macMealy st@State{stage=Ready} Input{Nothing, Nothing}
2
= (st, getOutputs st)
3
macMealy st@State{stage=Ready} Input{Nothing, Just newAcc}
4
= (st', getOutputs st')
5
where st ' = st{accumulator=newAcc}
6
macMealy st@State{stage=Multiplying, ..} Input{Nothing, Nothing}
7
= (st', getOutputs st')
8
where st ' = --
9
-- more cases following (omitted here)
Listing 1: Clash code using a Mealy machine to implement the MAC. Shown is
an excerpt of the multiplication part.
bits for initiating a MAC operation or setting the accumulator, respectively. The
design outputs two n + m-bit outputs for the last product and the accumulator
with corresponding valid bits.
The rest of this section describes the four design choices (“moving parts”)
investigated in this paper.
4.1
Mealy Machine vs. State Monad
This design choice is the most abstract one: should the designer opt for the well-
known approach of implementing a Mealy machine or should a more abstract
approach be followed.
Listing 1 shows a simplified code excerpt of how the corresponding Mealy
machine could be implemented in Clash. Each state-input pair must be matched
and then used to compute the next state and the output.
Contrast this with the code shown in Listing 2. The state monad-based ap-
proach allows organizing the code in a fashion that it resembles an impera-
tive programming language. The conditional setting of the accumulator value in
Line 3 and the general linear flow give the impression of an imperative program-
ming language. The MAC’s state is handled implicitly; nothing has to be passed
on explicitly. This can lead to code that is easier to read and might come more
natural to implement designs in.
We posit that using the state monad-based approach is more straight-forward
for designers used to imperative languages and, hence, might lead to shorter
design cycles.
4.2
Data Type of the Product
There are two obvious ways to store the product bits: Either as a BitVector
n, that is, n consecutive bits or using the type Vec n Bit; a vector that has n
entries of type Bit. Although these types look very similar, Vec is more general
as it allows to store arbitrary data types, not just Bits, and comes with a richer


8
Keszocze, Petersen, Friedemann, and Stuart
1
macMonad accumulateFun multiplyFun Input{values, newAcc} = do
2
-- conditionally set the accumulator to a new value
3
case newAcc of
4
(Just acc) -> modify' (\s -> s{accumulator=bitCoerce acc})
5
Nothing -> pure ()
6
7
-- start a new multiplication or continue with current computation
8
case values of
9
Just (x,y) -> modify' (startMulState x y)
10
Nothing -> do
11
stage <- gets stage
12
case stage of
13
Ready -> pure () -- do nothing
14
Multiplying -> modify' multiplyFun
15
Accumulating -> modify' accumulateFun
16
17
-- retrieve the current output
18
gets extractOuptut
Listing 2: Excerpt of the clash code implementing the MAC using the state
monad-based approach.
Application Programming Interface (API) that, e.g., provides many folding op-
erations that generate logarithmic reduction trees. Both types should be reduced
to the same Verilog type when using Vec n Bit. Hence, we expect that there
should be no significant difference in the resulting circuits allowing designers to
choose the data type/API that suits them best or is most descriptive.
4.3
Data Type of the Counters
Clash provides the type Index n consisting of the integers [0, n −1] represented
in the usual binary encoding using ⌈log2(n)⌉bits. This is the natural high-level
choice for the counters roundCtr and xCtr (see Algorithm 1, lines 2 and 3).
As incrementing an integer requires a (possibly specialized) adder, we imple-
ment another type of counter based on one-hot encoding. For this, a BitVector
n is used that starts with the least significant bit set to one and all other bits
set to zero. Each time the counter is increased, the set bit is shifted left by one
until it reaches the most significant bit. This implementation does not need any
adder hardware but requires designers to implement the overflow logic on their
own and, therefore, is a rather low-level approach; even though this can effec-
tively be hidden from the end-user by providing utility functions. For larger bit
widths, we expect this implementation to become too unwieldy as it requires n
bits instead of the ⌈log2(n)⌉bits used by Index.


Low-level optimizations in high-level HDLs: Is there a benefit?
9
4.4
Accessing and Updating Data
Accessing and updating the product and reading the current position within X
and Y can be carried out in different ways. Algorithm 1 uses functions allow for
a different implementation (see lines 5 and 7).
One approach is to take the counter values and compute an index to ac-
cess the product, e.g., productroundCtr+xCtr accesses the currently used product
bit.7 This is a high-level approach to implementing the MAC in an intuitive
fashion that closely resembles programming with arrays in regular programming
languages. We call this the index-based approach.
Reading and writing to arbitrary positions within the product requires (de-
)multiplexing. To avoid this, another approach is investigated in this paper:
replacing arbitrary indexing by indexing to the least-significant bit of a shifted
product, e.g., x[3] ≜(x ≫3)[0]. To avoid having to support shifting all values
between 1 and n −1, we only shift by 1 and store the updated value. This
approach requires special care of how the product register is rotated as it needs
to be reset after each round. As the patterns for X repeat, we rotate this value
instead of shifting in zeros. At the end of a round, the product needs to be shifted
back by n −1 to start the next round at the next-higher bit.
Implementing Algorithm 1 this way yields very difficult to understand Clash
code. Designers should only opt to implement a design this way if there is a clear
benefit with respect to non-functional properties, such as the circuit’s area and
make sure to “hide” it using a reasonable function names. We call this approach
rotation-based.
The right part of Table 1 illustrates this approach for the multiplication of
X = 6 and Y = 3.
These two approaches lead to the implementations of the functions high-
lighted in blue in Algorithm 1 as shown in Table 2. The endRound step becomes
quite complicated for the rotation-based approach as shown in Algorithm 2.
operation
index-based
rotation-based
getX/YBit
x/y[ctr]
x/y[0]
getProdBit
product[roundCtr+xCtr]
product[0]
setProdBit
product[roundCtr+xCtr]=s
product[0]=s
advanceX
–
x = rotate x 1
advanceY
–
y = y ≫1
endRound product[roundCtr+xCtr+1]=c
see Algorithm 2
Table 2: Implementations of the “moving parts” depending on the choice of the
accessing/modification method.
7 For the one-hot encoding approach, the position of the set bit has to be translated
into a number first.


10
Keszocze, Petersen, Friedemann, and Stuart
1 product ←rotate product 1
2 product[0] ←c
3 if after last round then
4
product ←rotate product 1
5 else
6
product ←rotateBackwards product (n −1)
7 end
Algorithm 2: The complex endRound step when using the rotation-based
approach.
4.5
Overview of the Designs
The choices described above give rise to 16 different designs per choice of bit-
width in total as the following decisions can be made:
– Mealy-machine-based or state monad-based modeling
– Data type of the product: BitVector or Vec
– Data type of the counters: one-hot encoding or using an off-the-shelf Index
– Method for updating the product: index-based or rotation-based
The code necessary to generate all designs is publicly available on GitHub8.
4.6
Testing the Clash Designs
Modern HDLs usually also come with sophisticated testing and/or verification
frameworks. Chisel, for example started with the rather simple chiseltest
framework which was later extended by ChiselVerify [15] to support, amongst
others, Constrained Random Verification (CRV) [16].
While Clash supports the automatic generation of classical Verilog test benches,
we agree with ´Erdi, quoting from [12, Page 24]:
“One common trait among FPGA vendor tools is that they range from
horribly painful to painfully horrible. In this book, interaction with the
FPGA toolchain is restricted to a minimum by writing everything we
can in Clash”
Clash designs are valid Haskell code and, therefore, can be tested using any
of the many software testing frameworks available for Haskell.9 The program
carrying out the tests is then similar to running a Verilator10 simulation.
A particularly interesting type of testing is property-based testing [17, 18].
This approach differs from classical unit testing in that it does not rely on
pre-specified inputs and the corresponding golden answers but allows to specify
8 https://github.com/keszocze/mac-clash-iwsbp26
9 The authors are fully aware that this only covers functional testing and that it relies
on the assumption of the Clash compiler being bug-free.
10 https://www.veripool.org/verilator/


Low-level optimizations in high-level HDLs: Is there a benefit?
11
properties (such as ∀x, y : MAC(x, y, acc) = x · y + acc) that are automatically
validated by generating random values and checking whether the property holds.
To prune the design space, we only investigate design with n = m. For bit-
widths n > 8, the designs have been tested with 200 randomly generated inputs.
For bit-widths n with n ≤8, all possible 2n+n inputs have been simulated,
effectively fully verifying the smaller designs. We do expect the test results to
also hold for cases where n̸ = m.
5
Experimental Evaluation
5.1
Verilog Designs
We also implemented the MAC unit in Verilog in order to investigate whether
differences in the area of synthesized designs stem from different implementation
choices or the used HDL. We are further interested to see whether there is a
general overhead introduced by either of the languages.
The architectural variants – indexing vs. rotating and base-2 counters vs. one-
hot counters – were also directly implemented in Verilog code. The interface’s
timing behavior was matched between the Clash and Verilog implementations,
and was verified using simulations of the hand-written Verilog code together
with the Verilog code compiled from the Clash implementation. To an external
observer, all implementations of the circuit would be identical.
5.2
Experimental Setup
Both Clash-derived and hand-written Verilog code was passed through the initial
steps of the default LibreLane flow for chip design using the SkyWater 130 nm
PDK, including linting, error-checking, and synthesis using the open-source tool
Yosys. The synthesis step produces a netlist of standard cells defined in the
process design kit (PDK). Standard cells correspond to memory elements in the
form of D-flipflops and logic elements in the form of logic gates such as “nand”
and “nor” as well as slightly more advanced logic operations on a few bits. The
PDK describes the function of the standard cells as well as their individual
area on a chip. For comparing the various implementations, the total area of the
synthesized circuit as well as the area of the sequential (memory) and logic parts
is considered individually.
The decision to stop after synthesis was made deliberately. Many additional
steps are needed to produce a functioning chip, but none of these steps take the
Clash-derived or hand-written Verilog files as input. They are rather based off
the synthesized netlist or other representations derived from the netlist. Each
of these steps may introduce changes to the circuits’ areas due to the physical
constraints of semiconductors and the manufacturing steps, but as these changes
are not directly related to the initial description of the circuit, they are considered
confounding factors better left out of the comparison.
We ran the flow for the 27 bit-widths n = 2, 3, . . . , 16, 20, 24, . . . , 64 and all
16 configurations as described in Section 4, effectively performing a full Design
Space Exploration (DSE).


12
Keszocze, Petersen, Friedemann, and Stuart
Fig. 1: Clash design choices with low influence on circuit sizes, left: Mealy ma-
chine vs. state monfad, right BitVector vs. Vec. Positive values indicate larger
area for Mealy (left) and BitVector (right) based implementations. The legend
shows individual factors by color, shape, and filled/hollow markers.
5.3
Evaluating the Design Choices
In this section, we will discuss the relative difference between circuits varying
in only one aspect, i.e. a single design choice (see Section 4). More concretely,
given two different versions v1 and v2 of the MAC unit, we compute
size(v1) −size(v2)
mean(size(v1), size(v2)),
i.e. the difference of all sizes for each design choice divided by the mean over all
sizes. The relative difference is shown as a function of the bit-width.
Variations within the Clash Designs Starting with the language specific
variations of the Clash implementations, specifically expressing the circuits as
a Mealy machine as opposed to a state monad (see Fig. 1, left) and using the
BitVector type as opposed to a Vector of bits type, minimal impact is seen on
the circuits’ areas (see Fig. 1, right). This indicates that little to no overhead
is associated with either of these variations. Consequently, for the investigated
circuits, designers can use any of these approaches with little concern for the
size of the synthesized circuit.
Moving into the architectural variations, comparing indexing into vs. rotating
the registers, a clear difference is seen (see Fig. 2, left). This is to be expected,
as N-input multiplexers, required for indexing, typically are implemented as
a tree of 2- or 3-input multiplexers giving an area scaling of O(N log2(N)).
This should be compared to the variant with rotating (barrel-shift) registers
that only requires O(1)-sized logic to control the shifting. The results show this
trend. Two groupings are seen corresponding to the other architectural variation,


Low-level optimizations in high-level HDLs: Is there a benefit?
13
Fig. 2: Clash design choices with strong influence on circuit sizes, left: Indexing
vs. rotating accesses, right: One-hot vs. index counters. Positive values indicate
larger area for indexing (left) and one-hot counter (right) based implementations.
where one grouping corresponds to the variation using base-2 counters, and the
other grouping corresponds to using one-hot counters. Considering the sequential
and combinatorial (logic) areas, zero difference is seen in the sequential areas
indicating that exactly the same number of bits is stored in registers for both
multiplexing and rotating, which is to be expected, whereas the difference seen in
total area is matched by the difference in logic area, which includes multiplexers.
Considering the comparison between counter types, again a clear difference
is seen (see Fig. 2, right). Using base-2 counters (i.e., Index) requires registers
of ⌈log2(N)⌉bits and having adders of the same width, whereas using one-hot
counters requires a shift-register and O(1) logic to control this register. Looking
at the area of sequential standard cells (flipflops), this difference in register width
is clearly seen and it is identical for all variations (all series have near-identical
relative differences). Looking at the difference in logic area, again two groupings
are seen corresponding to indexing vs. rotating. The circuits with base-2 counters
have lower area than those with one-hot counters, and for the first grouping
corresponding to rotating the difference is roughly constant, whereas it depends
on the bit-width for the second grouping corresponding to multiplexing. This is
as expected.
Variations within the Verilog Designs Comparing architectural variations
in the Verilog implementations shows similar trends as for the implementations
written in Clash: Indexing takes up larger area than rotating, albeit less pro-
nounced than in the Clash case (see Fig. 3, left), and one-hot counters take up
larger area than base-2 counters (see Fig. 3, right) with all the difference being
in the logic for multiplexing vs. rotating, and the counter variations having both
different sequential and logic areas, as expected.


14
Keszocze, Petersen, Friedemann, and Stuart
Fig. 3: Design choices in Verilog with a large influence on the resulting circuit size,
left: indexing vs. rotating accesses, right: One-hot vs. index counters. Positive
values indicate larger area for indexing (left) and one-hot counter (right) based
implementations.
Clash vs. Verilog Since little variation was seen between the Mealy machine
and state monad-based approach and between using either BitVector or Vector
for the Clash implementations, the hand-written Verilog is compared to the
Clash-implementations using a Mealy machine and the Vector type.
The area of the hand-written Verilog circuits is lower than that of the Clash
implementations in practically all cases (see Fig. 4). The difference, however,
varies across the four architectural variations. The largest difference is seen for
the circuits using multiplexing. As previously described, all circuits have identical
behavior on the interface, therefore it can be concluded that the hand-written
Verilog implementations produce netlists of fewer or smaller standard cells than
the Clash implementations. This corresponds to a reduced logic complexity, and
while the details in why these differences arise are yet to be investigated, it is
a strong indication that either the Clash implementation or the Clash compiler
results in higher complexity for the same operation than a direct implementation
in a lower-level language such as Verilog. Interestingly, both for the area of
sequential and logic cells, a dependence is seen on the bit-width with Verilog
requiring increasingly less area of both types with increasing bit-width. This
indicates that the Clash implementations both have a larger state and a higher
logic complexity.
6
Conclusion & Outlook
While the results shown in the previous section indicate smaller state and lower
logic complexity of hand-written Verilog compared to the Clash implementa-
tions, other factors not included in the present study need to be considered


Low-level optimizations in high-level HDLs: Is there a benefit?
15
Fig. 4: Size comparison of hand-written Verilog to Clash. Positive values indicate
larger area for Clash-implementations.
before making a conclusion about the benefits of one language over another.
For one, while area is an important aspect of chip design, other aspects such as
latency, throughput, power, and energy consumption are also highly important
metrics. For a study as the one presented here with more than a thousand syn-
thesized circuits, the area of the synthesized netlist is the simplest to extract,
and given the stated differences in state size and logic complexity, it would be
highly unexpected to see opposing trends for area, latency, throughput, or power
consumption.
However, these “hard” metrics are not always the most important ones in
the real world. For example, the chip design tools tend to create a 2-D bounding
box containing the interface on the periphery and the functionality (standard
cells) inside the box. For simple circuits with a “large” interface - measured as
the total number of bits – the logic complexity may be of secondary importance
as the size of the bounding box will be decided by the interface size, while the
circuit may only take up a small fraction of the box’s area. In such cases, the
agility in development cycles offered by higher-level languages may be preferable
over having closer-to-optimal designs from the start. It does not seem farfetched
to envision a design flow starting from descriptions using high-level languages in
an agile workflow followed by profiling and targeted low-level optimizations or
even re-implementations in low-level languages where needed. Further study is
needed to evaluate the efficacy of such design flows.
As additional future work, we intend to extend our comparison to the Chisel
HDL (similar to [9]) and Amaranth. We will also try to match the areas obtained
from the hand-written Verilog code to see how much effort is necessary to become
truly competitive with respect to area. We also intend to compare the result
obtained by the open-source tools to commercial tools.


16
Keszocze, Petersen, Friedemann, and Stuart
References
[1]
Jonathan Bachrach et al. “Chisel: Constructing Hardware in a Scala Em-
bedded Language”. In: Design Automation Conference. June 2012.
[2]
SpinalHDL. Version v1.10.2a. July 4, 2024. url: https://github.com/
SpinalHDL/SpinalHDL.
[3]
J. Decaluwe. “MyHDL: A Python-Based Hardware Description Language.”
In: Linux Journal 127 (2004). issn: 1075-3583.
[4]
Amaranth HDL. Version 0.5.8. Amaranth HDL, Aug. 15, 2025. url: https:
//github.com/amaranth-lang/amaranth.
[5]
Christiaan Baaij et al. “ClaSH: Structural Descriptions of Synchronous
Hardware Using Haskell”. In: Euromicro Conference on Digital System
Design. Sept. 2010. isbn: 978-1-4244-7839-2.
[6]
Krste Asanovi´c et al. The Rocket Chip Generator. UCB/EECS-2016-17.
University of California at Berkeley, Apr. 15, 2016.
[7]
Henry Cook, Wesley Terpstra, and Yunsup Lee. “Diplomatic Design Pat-
terns: A TileLink Case Study”. In: Workshop on Computer Architecture
Research with RISC-V. Oct. 17, 2017.
[8]
Martin Schoeberl et al. “Scala Defined Hardware Generators for Chisel”.
In: Microprocessors and Microsystems 117 (Sept. 1, 2025). issn: 0141-9331.
[9]
Paul Lennon and Richard Gahan. “A Comparative Study of Chisel for
FPGA Design”. In: Irish Signals and Systems Conference. June 2018.
[10]
QBayLogic B.V. Clash Tutorial.
[11]
Where Lions Roam: RISC-V on the VELDT. Standard Semiconductor,
Aug. 3, 2024. url: https://github.com/standardsemiconductor/lion.
[12]
Gerg˝o ´Erdi. Retrocomputing with Clash: Haskell for FPGA Hardware De-
sign. Sept. 12, 2021.
[13]
George H. Mealy. “A Method for Synthesizing Sequential Circuits”. In:
The Bell System Technical Journal 34.5 (Sept. 1955). issn: 0005-8580.
[14]
Miloˇs D. Ercegovac and Tom´as Lang. Digital Arithmetic. June 10, 2003.
isbn: 978-1-55860-798-9.
[15]
Andrew Dobis et al. “ChiselVerify: An Open-Source Hardware Verifica-
tion Library for Chisel and Scala”. In: IEEE Nordic Circuits and Systems
Conference. Oct. 2021.
[16]
Ashok B. Mehta. “Constrained Random Verification (CRV)”. In: ASIC/SoC
Functional Design Verification: A Comprehensive Guide to Technologies
and Methodologies. Ed. by Ashok B. Mehta. 2018. isbn: 978-3-319-59418-
7.
[17]
George Fink and Matt Bishop. “Property-Based Testing: A New Approach
to Testing for Assurance”. In: SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes 22.4 (July 1,
1997). issn: 0163-5948.
[18]
Harrison Goldstein et al. “Property-Based Testing in Practice”. In: Inter-
national Conference on Software Engineering. Apr. 12, 2024. isbn: 979-8-
4007-0217-4.
