Title: Non-uniform Memory Partitioning For Low-Power Spiking Neural Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.30444v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 02:15:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
# Non-uniform Memory Partitioning For Low-Power Spiking Neural Networks 

Simon Richter, Dar´ ıo Fern´ andez Khatiboun, Maryam Sadeghi, Milad Zamani, Farshad Moradi Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Aarhus University, Denmark 

Abstract —Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) naturally excel in processing temporally rich and sparse data. However, because of their time-stepped processing, memory access, specifically to synaptic weights stored in SRAM (static random-access memory), tends to dominate total power consumption. To address this issue, without incurring a large area overhead, we propose to leverage the greatly varying average firing rate of neurons in the network to efficiently allocate synaptic weights to an on-chip memory consisting of multiple non-uniformly sized memory banks. By assigning weights of frequently firing neurons to shallow, low-access cost memory and less actively accessed weights to deeper, high-density memories, the average power consumption of the synaptic weight memory is decreased without incurring a large area overhead. To benchmark our proposed architecture and find optimal configurations of memory arrangements, we perform an automatic exploration based on application requirements and hardware constraints. For memory designs synthesized in 28-nm CMOS technology, we show that our architecture can achieve a synaptic weight memory access power reduction of up to 61% compared to a conventional design, with a 2.1 × lower area overhead, as compared to a traditional uniformly partitioned memory bank that achieves a comparable reduction. 

Index Terms —Spiking Neural Networks, Hardware accelera-tors, On-chip memory organization, SRAM 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have emerged as a promis-ing alternative to conventional artificial neural networks (ANNs). SNNs mimic biological neurons by representing information as single-bit spike streams across time, potentially achieving higher energy efficiency compared to their ANN counterparts because of their event-driven data processing. In recent digital SNN implementations, memory access to synap-tic weights stored in static random-access memory (SRAM) has been the main contributor to power consumption [1]–[3]. To mitigate this issue, weight memory can be subdivided into multiple smaller, uniformly sized, and individually addressable memory banks [1], [4]. However, this imposes overheads, as when the memory is partitioned into increasingly finer segments, the area and power overhead incurred by the SRAM peripheral logic begins to dominate. To address this challenge, we propose a non-uniform SRAM partitioning scheme, where the SRAM is divided into banks 

© 2025 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. This is the accepted author manuscript. Published in the 2025 7th IEEE Inter-national Conference on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS) ,2025, doi: 10.1109/AICAS64808.2025.11173151. BANK #K BANK #0  

> Average Firing Rate Pre-synaptic Neurons N0ttt
> Nn-1
> w0,0 w0,1 ... w0,m w1,0 w1,1 ... w1,m wn,0 wn,1 ... wn,m
> BANK #0 BANK #i
> Assign to low access power SRAM bank
> Area per bit Access power Synaptic Weights Nn
> . . . . . .
> . . .
> Non-Uniform Synapse SRAM
> Assign to high density SRAM bank

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed non-uniform synapse memory architecture with firing-activity based bank allocation. 

of varying depths, and weights are allocated to banks based on the firing activity of pre-synaptic neurons, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In SNNs, due to the nonuniform firing rate of neurons, the frequency at which different synaptic weights are accessed can vary greatly. By storing the weights associated with more frequently firing pre-synaptic neurons in a more shallow, less expensive to access SRAM, and less frequently accessed memories in deeper and denser SRAM, the average memory access cost decreases without a large area overhead. This approach necessitates additional resources to locate the weights in the SRAM banks, which can result in extra latency and logic complexity. To tackle this issue, we propose a neuron sorting technique, where the order in which neurons are iterated over in the SNN controller and address allocation of their weights depends on their expected firing activity. The main contributions in this work can be summarized as:  

> •

We propose a non-uniform synaptic weight memory that combines the advantages of both shallow, low-access cost memories with deeper, high-density memories by leveraging the varying fire rate across neurons in SNNs.  

> •

An efficient address mapping and neuron sorting scheme is proposed to simplify the memory access order to individual memory banks.  

> •

We investigate the firing rate distribution of neurons across networks for neuromorphic applications and high-light the highly non-uniform distribution of spike firings.  

> •

We perform an automatic exploration of how the mem-ories can be optimally arranged in the proposed non-uniform architecture to achieve maximal access power arXiv:2608.30444v1 [cs.AR] 31 Aug 2026 reduction at the smallest manageable area overhead. Our results show that the proposed memory architecture can reduce access power by upward of 61%, at a 2.1 × lower area overhead compared to a conventional design. II. N EUROMORPHIC ACCELERATORS 

Various SNN application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) have been proposed, ranging from analog [5]–[7] to fully-digital architectures [1], [8], [9]. However, digital designs have shown greater flexibility and scalability. To achieve high densities of neurons and synapses, a neuron processing unit (NPU) is commonly shared, emulating several neurons and their accumulation of synaptic weights and the generation of output spikes [10]. Computing in a time-stepped manner involves updating all neurons within a predefined time interval (timestep), during which synaptic weights are accessed sequentially. Only synaptic weights corresponding to pre-synaptic neurons that have fired in the previous time step need to be accessed. This approach skips unnecessary access to the synapse SRAM and leads to a memory access pattern that depends on the firing rate of neurons in the network. Fig. 2 illustrates the power breakdown of existing digital SNN accelerator designs, highlighting that access to synaptic SRAM dominates the total power consumption of the system. 70% ESSCIRC [ 1]49% JSSC [ 2]Synaptic SRAM Other 75% TCAS-1 [ 3] 

> Fig. 2. Power breakdown of neuromorphic accelerators.

III. P ROPOSED MEMORY ARCHITECTURE 

A. Memory Organization and Address Allocation 

We propose partitioning the synaptic weight memory into multiple, individually addressable memory banks. Each bank consists of a single foundry-provided and pre-compiled SRAM macro with peripheral logic. From the SNN controller’s per-spective, the non-uniform synapse SRAM is perceived as a single, continuous, address space with the combined depth of all concatenated banks. The banks are organized in such a way that the lowest ranges of addresses are formed by and map to the shallowest memory banks with the lowest access power. We assume a generic controller architecture similar to existing SNN designs, where first the membrane potential of a given neuron is loaded from a Neuron SRAM, and then all weights mapping to (firing) spikes in the current neuron receptive field are loaded and processed. By storing more frequently accessed weights in more shallow memory banks, the average power consumption from memory access can be reduced. To avoid the requirement for look-up logic for the controller to determine in which bank of the non-uniform memory a given synaptic weight is stored, which would incur extra complexity and latency, we propose a firing activity-based sorting and address allocation scheme of neurons and synaptic weights. After training, the network is profiled in terms of memory accesses based on firing rates, the network topology, and the accelerator architecture for address allocation. The implementation of this scheme for of fully connected layer is straightforward, as all post-synaptic neurons are con-nected to any given pre-synaptic neuron. All synaptic weights originating from the most actively firing neurons are assigned to the shallowest banks of the non-uniform memory. With the pre-synaptic neuron ID forming the least significant bits (LSBs) of the weight address, weights can be allocated into memory in a way that follows the recorded firing activity of the pre-synaptic neurons. This approach ensures that when the address increases, the expected average access rate to that address decreases, mapping to larger banks in the non-uniform memory. For convolutional layers, more care has to be taken during the assignment of synaptic weights to addresses in the non-uniform memory, as multiple neurons share the same kernel weights. We assume a controller architecture similar to that used for the fully connected layers. For the convolutional layers, the receptive field of a given neuron depends on the position of the post-synaptic neuron in the output feature ( xout ,

yout , ch out ). Since the same kernels are applied to the entire input region ( xin , y in ), the access rate of different weights within the same kernel will be roughly the same (ignoring cases at the edge of the image where only part of the kernel may be applied to the input region). The same applies to kernels across different output channels ch out . For such an architecture, the access rate is therefore mainly dependent on the input channel ch in and its firing activity. This simplifies the allocation to the non-uniform memory, as all kernel weights for a given input channel can be stored in the same region of the non-uniform weight memory. Knowing the size of each convolutional layer, the SNNs controller then only has to iterate over the input channels in order of descending fire activity, so that as the weight address is incremented it follows the expected average access rate to each address. 

B. Memory Control Logic 

A circuit overview of the proposed non-uniform memory ar-chitecture is shown in Fig. 3. The weight memory is organized into individually addressable, pre-compiled, SRAM macros of varying sizes (Bank 0 - Bank n). Control logic consists of clock gating cells (CG) (A), bank select decoders (B), output select logic (C), and address offset control (D). The individual control logic blocks operate as follows: (A) The clock-gating cell assures glitch-free disabling of the clock line to inactive memory banks. The gating of the individual memory clocks is controlled by the respective enable signal of that bank. Gated Clk            

> Clock-gate cell (CG)
> CLK < B1 depth
> Bank select decoder
> EN[1] EN[n] DQEN EN[0] ADDR
> Output select
> One-hot decoder DQ
> Qn
> Q1
> Q0
> EN DQ
> Out Memory control logic Pre-compiled SRAM macros
> ADDR
> Q1QnQ0
> EN[0]
> EN[1]
> EN[n]
> Non-uniform synaptic weight memory
> Bank select decoder
> DCLK
> SLP. CS CLK Bank n ADQBank 0 ADQSLP. CS CLK  Bank 1 SLP. CS CLK ADQAddress offset control CG CG CG Address offset control
> n
> SLP. CS CLK
> (A) (B) (C) (D) (A) (B) (D)
> ADDR B0 ADDR B1 ADDR Bn ADDR  log 2(B0 depth ) LSBs log 2(B1 depth ) LSBs log 2(Bn depth ) LSBs < B0 depth
> < Bn depth
> Q
> Output select
> (C)

Fig. 3. Overview of the memory architecture for a configuration along with memory control logic. 

(B) The bank select decoder outputs a one-hot enable signal to the corresponding memory bank based on the input weight address by comparing it to the depth of each memory bank. (C) The output select logic drives the output Q with the synaptic weight accessed from the previously selected memory bank. The selection is based on the enable signal from the previous access cycle, to account for the time required between applying an address at a bank’s port and receiving the corresponding data at the banks output. (D) The address offset control calculates the correctly offset address for each individual memory bank so that the concatenated memory bank forms a continuous address space from the view of the SNN controller. IV. R ESULTS 

A. Benchmark Network Setup 

The evaluation of the non-uniform memory partition scheme is conducted by targeting four different datasets: image recog-nition (N-MNIST [11]), gesture recognition (DVSGesture [12]), and two KWS tasks (GSC [13] and HD [14]). Both GSC and HD datasets were pre-processed using the speech2spikes algorithm [15] for two fully connected SNNs, while DVS-Gesture and N-MNIST were cropped and downsampled at a resolution of 32x32 for two convolutional networks. The network topologies are described in table I. All networks were trained with snnTorch [16] using LIF neuron models and trained using backpropagation with asurrogate gradient descent. The weights were quantized to 8 bits. The two larger networks (2) & (3) have a footprint of roughly 65000 parameters, allowing them to be deployed in a 64KB synaptic weight memory. The smaller networks (1) & (4) are sized to fit in a 32KB synaptic weight memory. The same networks, with the same level of quantization, are 

TABLE I NETWORKS USED FOR BENCHMARKING .

Dataset (Net) Architecture Size Acc. (%) N-MNIST (1) 8conv5-MP2-14Conv5-MP2-28Conv5-AP2-512FC11 32KB 94.9% 

DVSGesture (2) 32conv5-AP2-58Conv5-AP2-1450Fc11 64kB 91.2% 

GSC (3) 40Fc160-160Fc160-160Fc35 64KB 83.5% 

HD (4) 40Fc120-120Fc120-120Fc20 32KB 95.3% 

deployed on both the traditional and the proposed non-uniform memory architectures, resulting in no difference in accuracy between the two. 

B. Memory Access Distribution 

After training each network, the firing activity of each neuron was recorded over the entire test datasets. The memory access rate of each synaptic weight was derived from the recorded firing activities and the memory access order de-scribed in III-A. The subset of accesses to the most frequently read weights, as a share of all weights in the network, is shown in table II. 

TABLE II SHARE OF TOTAL WEIGHT ACCESSES TO SUBSET OF MOST FREQUENTLY ACCESSED WEIGHTS .

Dataset (Net) Share of all memory accesses from Y% most frequently accessed weights Y = 10% Y = 25% Y = 50% N-MNIST (1) 54.1% 63.2% 77.2% 

DVSGesture (2) 71.0% 79.4% 87.5% 

GSC (3) 33.8% 62.4% 88.7% 

HD (4) 35.1% 73.8% 93.8% 

The results show a large variety in the access rate of synaptic weights across both fully connected and convolutional networks. For the networks trained on KWS tasks, roughly a third of all memory accesses are to only 10% of the most frequently accessed weights. The convolutional networks show even more imbalance in the access rate, with 54.1% and 71.0% of accesses being at the top 10% of the weights for the N-MNIST and DVS networks, respectively. 

C. Design Space Exploration 

An automated design space exploration was set up to evaluate non-uniform synapse memories and find the optimal configuration based on application and hardware constraints. For all networks evaluated, we assumed that a single 8-bit synaptic weight is stored per addressable word in the memory. This was based on the fact that to leverage the high sparsity of spikes, an efficient SNN should be able to load single synaptic weights at a time. Otherwise, upon receiving a single spike, it may have to load weights corresponding to pre-synaptic neurons which have not fired. The used SRAM macros were limited to sizes between 1 KB and 32 KB with the upper limit being set by the provided memory compiler and the lower limit by the observation that there was no further reduction in access power by reducing the memory size further. For the smaller 32 KB synapse memory, a total of 202 possi-ble ways to assemble a concatenated 32 KB memory using the available smaller macros were found. For the 64 KB synapse memory, the possible combinations had to be constrained to be reasonably evaluated, resulting in 686 combinations. For each of the found combinations, a synthesizable Verilog code was automatically generated. The code instantiates the available memory macros along with the memory control logic described in section III-B. 

D. Synthesis Setup 

The generated Verilog code from the design space ex-ploration for both the uniform and non-uniform memories was synthesized in 28-nm CMOS technology. The individual memory macros were generated using the foundry-provided memory compiler tools. All evaluated designs were synthe-sized at 100 MHz using libraries in the Typical-Typical (TT) corner at 25 ◦C and a 1 V supply voltage. To accurately evaluate the read access power of each memory, a switching activity file was generated for each benchmark network to model the SNN controller and its read requests to the synaptic weight memory. The access pattern was based on the extracted average neural firing activities as described in IV-B and uses the address allocation and access scheme described in III-A. 

E. Access Power Reduction and Area Overhead 

The quantified values of both area and access power for select well-performing non-uniform memories from the de-sign space exploration are shown in table III. Both access power reduction and memory area overhead are represented in percentage change over a conventional synapse memory consisting of a single SRAM bank. The non-uniform configurations A & B form a 64KB memory and are evaluated on network 2 & 3 in table I. Configurations C & D form a 32KB memory and are evaluated on networks 1 & 4. Reported read access power includes both dynamic and leakage power during inference. V. D ISCUSSION 

Power/Area trade-off: Compared to a single 32KB-sized synaptic weight memory, the non-uniform architectures are able to reduce memory access power by upwards of 63%, at an 18% area overhead. While segmenting the weight memory into uniformly sized banks can achieve similar results in terms of access power reduction, this tends to come at a much greater area overhead, as some of the banks go heavily underutilized. The 32KB configuration D for example, is able to achieve a greater access power reduction than the uniform 8x4KB memory, at a 2.1 × lower area overhead. 

Control logic overhead: Across all of the select non-uniform memory configurations, the area of the control logic made up less than one percentage of the total memory area.                               

> TABLE III SYNTHESIS RESULTS FOR SELECT MEMORY CONFIGURATIONS FROM THE DESIGN SPACE EXPLORATION . A REA AND POWER IS NORMALIZED AND IN RELATION TO THE SIZE AND POWER OF A CONVENTIONAL SYNAPSE MEMORY CONSISTING OF A SINGLE SRAM MACRO .
> ID Size Content Power Reduction Area Overhead
> Proposed Non-Uniform Memories A64KB 1×32KB 1×16KB 1×8KB 2×4KB DVS: 49% GSC: 40% 8% B64KB 2×16KB 2×8KB 7×2KB 2×1KB DVS: 57% GSC: 49% 16% C32KB 1×16KB 2×8KB N-MNIST: 39% HD: 38% 13% D32KB 2×8KB 8×2KB N-MNIST: 63% HD: 61% 18% Uniform Memories E64KB 4×16KB 23% 4% F64KB 8×8KB 38% 23% G32KB 4×8KB 37% 22% H32KB 8×4KB 58% 38%

The control logic requires no additional clock cycles of delay for a memory access, as the added delay through the added control logic is negligible compared to timing constraints of the memory macros themselves, making the proposed design suitable also for real-time applications. 

Variation across network architecture & datasets: As the share of memory accesses to the most frequently accessed weights in the convolutional networks targeting N-MNIST and DVS is larger than in the fully connected networks, these networks perform better than the fully connected ones on the non-uniform memories in the select benchmarks. At most, the difference in access power reduction between any of the benchmarks is around 14%, showing that the proposed architecture can generalize well across varying network sizes and topologies. 

Flexibility: A non-uniform memory architecture can pro-vide greater flexibility in deploying networks of varying sizes, as unlike traditional synapse memories, which require full memory occupancy for optimal use, smaller networks can be efficiently deployed in more shallow memory regions, with unused macros disabled for improved efficiency. VI. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we presented how a non-uniform memory architecture can be applied to SNNs to reduce the memory access cost by allocating synaptic weight to memory banks of varying sizes based on average neural firing activities. A detailed circuit-level architecture is proposed along with an efficient address allocation scheme to eliminate the need for bank lookup logic. Results across multiple networks and datasets have demonstrated that our proposed architecture can reduce memory access power drastically compared to a single synaptic weight memory bank, at a significantly lower area overhead as compared to a uniformly partitioned memory. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

This work was supported by Innovationsfonden through the CORROSENSE Project under Grant 2081-00027A. REFERENCES [1] M. M. Wong, S. B. Shrestha, V. P. Nambiar, A. Mani, Y. K. Lee, E. K. Koh, W. Jiang, K. T. C. Chai, and A. T. Do, “A 2.1 pj/sop 40nm snn accelerator featuring on-chip transfer learning using delta stdp,” in 

ESSCIRC 2021 - IEEE 47th European Solid State Circuits Conference (ESSCIRC) , 2021, pp. 95–98. [2] G. K. Chen, R. Kumar, H. E. Sumbul, P. C. Knag, and R. K. Krishna-murthy, “A 4096-neuron 1m-synapse 3.8-pj/sop spiking neural network with on-chip stdp learning and sparse weights in 10-nm finfet cmos,” 

IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits , vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 992–1002, 2019. [3] J. Pu, W. L. Goh, V. P. Nambiar, M. M. Wong, and A. T. Do, “A 5.28-mm² 4.5-pj/sop energy-efficient spiking neural network hardware with reconfigurable high processing speed neuron core and congestion-aware router,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers ,vol. 68, no. 12, pp. 5081–5094, 2021. [4] A. Macii, L. Benini, and M. Poncino, Memory Design Techniques for Low Energy Embedded Systems , 01 2002. [5] S. Kim, S. Kim, S. Um, S. Kim, Z. Li, S. Kim, W. Jo, and H.-j. Yoo, “A reconfigurable 1t1c edram-based spiking neural network computing-in-memory processor for high system-level efficiency,” in 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) , 2023, pp. 1–5. [6] S. Moradi, N. Qiao, F. Stefanini, and G. Indiveri, “A scalable multicore architecture with heterogeneous memory structures for dynamic neu-romorphic asynchronous processors (dynaps),” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 106–122, 2018. [7] M. Ronchini, Y. Rezaeiyan, M. Zamani, G. Panuccio, and F. Moradi, “Net-ten: a silicon neuromorphic network for low-latency detection of seizures in local field potentials,” Journal of Neural Engineering , vol. 20, no. 3, p. 036002, 2023. [8] C. Frenkel, M. Lefebvre, J.-D. Legat, and D. Bol, “A 0.086-mm 2 12.7-pj/sop 64k-synapse 256-neuron online-learning digital spiking neuro-morphic processor in 28-nm cmos,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems , vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 145–158, 2019. [9] J. Zhang, D. Huo, J. Zhang, C. Qian, Q. Liu, L. Pan, Z. Wang, N. Qiao, K.-T. Tang, and H. Chen, “Anp-i: A 28-nm 1.5-pj/sop asynchronous spiking neural network processor enabling sub-0.1-μ j/sample on-chip learning for edge-ai applications,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits ,vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 2717–2729, 2024. [10] C. Frenkel, D. Bol, and G. Indiveri, “Bottom-up and top-down ap-proaches for the design of neuromorphic processing systems: Tradeoffs and synergies between natural and artificial intelligence,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 111, no. 6, pp. 623–652, 2023. [11] G. Orchard, A. Jayawant, G. K. Cohen, and N. Thakor, “Converting static image datasets to spiking neuromorphic datasets using saccades,” 

Frontiers in Neuroscience , vol. 9, 2015. [12] A. Amir, B. Taba, D. Berg, T. Melano, J. McKinstry, C. Di Nolfo, T. Nayak, A. Andreopoulos, G. Garreau, M. Mendoza, J. Kusnitz, M. Debole, S. Esser, T. Delbruck, M. Flickner, and D. Modha, “A low power, fully event-based gesture recognition system,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2017, pp. 7388–7397. [13] P. Warden, “Speech Commands: A Dataset for Limited-Vocabulary Speech Recognition,” ArXiv e-prints , Apr. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.03209 [14] B. Cramer, Y. Stradmann, J. Schemmel, and F. Zenke, “The heidelberg spiking data sets for the systematic evaluation of spiking neural net-works,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems ,vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 2744–2757, 2022. [15] K. M. Stewart, T. Shea, N. Pacik-Nelson, E. Gallo, and A. Danielescu, “Speech2spikes: Efficient audio encoding pipeline for real-time neuromorphic systems,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Annual Neuro-Inspired Computational Elements Conference , ser. NICE ’23. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, p. 71–78. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3584954.3584995 [16] J. K. Eshraghian, M. Ward, E. Neftci, X. Wang, G. Lenz, G. Dwivedi, M. Bennamoun, D. S. Jeong, and W. D. Lu, “Training spiking neural networks using lessons from deep learning,” Proceedings of the IEEE ,vol. 111, no. 9, pp. 1016–1054, 2023.